NSW Education Standards AuthorityMathematics K-10 (2022)
curriculum.nsw.edu.au
Generated Dec 2025

Downloaded December 2025
(c) 2025 NSW Education Standards Authority 
NESA acknowledges Traditional Owners and Custodians of Country throughout NSW, and pays respect to Elders past and present. NESA recognises Aboriginal Peoples' continuing Cultures and Connections to lands, waters, skies and Community.
The documents on the NSW Education Standards Authority (NESA) website and the NSW Curriculum website contain material prepared by NESA for and on behalf of the Crown in right of the State of New South Wales. The material is protected by Crown copyright. 
These websites hold the only official and up-to-date versions of the documents available on the internet. Any other copies of these documents, or parts of these documents, that may be found elsewhere on the internet might not be current and are not authorised. You cannot rely on copies from any other source. 
All rights are reserved. No part of the material may be: 
* reproduced in Australia or in any other country by any process, electronic or otherwise, in any material form 
* transmitted to any other person or stored electronically in any form without the written permission of NESA except as permitted by the Copyright Act 1968 (Cth). 
When you access the material, you agree: 
* to use the material for research or study, criticism or review, reporting news and parody or satire 
* to use the material for information purposes only 
* not to modify the material or any part of the material without the written permission of NESA 
* to reproduce a single copy for personal bona fide study use only and not to reproduce any major extract or the entire material without the permission of NESA 
* to include this copyright notice in any copy made 
* to acknowledge that NESA is the source of the material. 
The documents may include third-party copyright material such as photos, diagrams, quotations, cartoons and artworks. This material is protected by Australian and international copyright laws and may not be reproduced or transmitted in any format without the copyright owner's permission. Unauthorised reproduction, transmission or commercial use of such copyright material may result in prosecution. 
NESA has made all reasonable attempts to locate the owners of third-party copyright material. NESA invites anyone from whom permission has not been sought to contact the Copyright Officer.
Special arrangements applying to the NSW Curriculum Reform 
As part of the NSW Curriculum Reform process, NESA grants a limited non-exclusive licence to: 
* teachers employed in NSW government schools and registered non-government schools 
* representatives from peak school education bodies, such as the NSW Department of Education, Catholic Schools NSW, the Association of Independent Schools of NSW and TAFE NSW
* parents of children registered for home schooling 
to use, modify and adapt the NSW syllabuses for non-commercial educational use only. The adaptation must not have the effect of bringing NESA into disrepute. 
Note: The above arrangements do not apply to private/home tutoring companies, professional learning service providers, publishers, and other organisations.
For more information on the above or for commercial use or any other purpose, please contact the Copyright Officer for permission. 
Email: copyright@nesa.nsw.edu.au
Table of contents
Table of contents	4
Mathematics K-10 (2022)	7
K-2 Implementation survey	7
Overview	7
Syllabus overview	7
Rationale	14
Aim	15
Table of outcomes	16
Secondary (7-10)	16
Outcomes and content for Stage 4	25
Computation with integers	25
Fractions, decimals and percentages	28
Ratios and rates	36
Algebraic techniques	39
Indices	43
Equations	46
Linear relationships	49
Length	53
Right-angled triangles (Pythagoras' theorem)	56
Area	58
Volume	64
Angle relationships	66
Properties of geometrical figures	72
Data classification and visualisation	76
Data analysis	80
Probability	83
Outcomes and content for Stage 5	85
Financial mathematics A	85
Financial mathematics B	87
Algebraic techniques A	88
Indices A	90
Equations A	92
Linear relationships A	93
Linear relationships B	97
Non-linear relationships A	100
Non-linear relationships B	102
Numbers of any magnitude	104
Trigonometry A	106
Trigonometry B	108
Area and surface area A	110
Volume A	114
Properties of geometrical figures A	115
Data analysis A	117
Data analysis B	120
Probability A	122
Variation and rates of change A (Path)	125
Variation and rates of change B (Path)	129
Algebraic techniques B (Path)	131
Algebraic techniques C (Path)	133
Indices B (Path)	135
Indices C (Path)	137
Equations B (Path)	139
Equations C (Path)	140
Linear relationships C (Path)	143
Non-linear relationships C (Path)	147
Polynomials (Path)	151
Logarithms (Path)	154
Functions and other graphs (Path)	156
Trigonometry C (Path)	159
Trigonometry D (Path)	160
Area and surface area B (Path)	163
Volume B (Path)	165
Properties of geometrical figures B (Path)	166
Properties of geometrical figures C (Path)	170
Circle geometry (Path)	172
Introduction to networks (Path)	176
Data analysis C (Path)	181
Probability B (Path)	182
Life Skills for Stages 4/5	187
Life Skills table of outcomes	187
Life Skills outcomes and content for Stage 4/5	190
Language of number	190
Counting	193
Representing number	195
Comparing and ordering	198
Fractions	201
Decimals and percentages	204
Addition and subtraction	207
Multiplication and division	210
Recognising money	213
Financial management	216
Patterns	220
Recognising time	223
Interpreting time	225
Length	230
Volume, capacity and mass	232
Area	235
Geometry	237
Position	240
Representing data	243
Interpreting data	246
Chance and probability	248
Assessment	251
Common Grade Scale	251
Course performance descriptors	251
Assessment of Life Skills outcomes	252

Mathematics K-10 (2022)
K-2 Implementation survey
Provide feedback on the implementation of the Mathematics syllabus for K-2.
The Mathematics K-10 Syllabus (2022): K-2 Implementation survey will run from 8 September - 19 December 2025.
Implementation from 2024
The new Mathematics K-10 Syllabus (2022) is to be implemented from 2024 and replaces the Mathematics K-10 Syllabus (2012).
School sectors are responsible for implementing syllabuses and are best placed to provide schools with specific guidance and information on implementation given their understanding of their individual contexts.
Overview
Syllabus overview
Organisation of Mathematics K-10
The syllabus structure illustrates the important role Working mathematically plays across all areas of mathematics and reflects the strengthened connections between concepts. Working mathematically has been embedded in the outcomes, content and examples of the syllabus.
Mathematics K-10 outcomes and their related content are organised in:
* Number and algebra
* Measurement and space
* Statistics and probability
Working mathematically
The Working mathematically processes present in the Mathematics K-10 syllabus are:
* communicating
* understanding and fluency
* reasoning
* problem solving.
Students learn to work mathematically by using these processes in an interconnected way. The coordinated development of these processes results in students becoming mathematically proficient.
When students are Working mathematically it is important to help them to reflect on how they have used their thinking to solve problems. This assists students to develop 'mathematical habits of mind' (Cuoco et al. 2010).
Students need many experiences that require them to relate their knowledge to the vocabulary and conceptual frameworks of mathematics.
Overarching Working mathematically outcome
To highlight how these processes are interrelated, in Mathematics K-10 there is one overarching Working mathematically outcome.
A student develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through:
* exploring and connecting mathematical concepts
* choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems
* communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly.
The Working mathematically outcome describes the thinking and doing of mathematics. In doing so, the outcome indicates the breadth of mathematical actions that teachers need to emphasise. The overarching Working mathematically outcome is the same across the K-10 Mathematics syllabus.
The Working mathematically processes should be embedded within the concepts being taught. Embedding Working mathematically ensures students are able to fluently understand concepts and make connections to other focus areas. The mathematics focus area outcomes and content provide the knowledge and skills for students to 'reason about', and contexts for problem solving. The overarching Working mathematically outcome is assessed in conjunction with the mathematics content outcomes. The sophistication of Working mathematically processes develops through each stage of learning and can be observed in relation to the increase in complexity of the mathematics outcomes and content. A student's level of competence in Working mathematically can be monitored over time, for example, within Additive Relations by the choice of strategy appropriate to the task, and the use of efficient strategy for the stage of learning the student is working at.
Further information is available in Elaborating on Working mathematically in K-10 (Word, 5 pages, 914.28 kB).

Figure 1: The organisation of Mathematics K-2

Image long description: An overview of the syllabus structure for Early Stage 1 and Stage 1 in Mathematics across the 3 areas of Number and algebra, Measurement and space, and Statistics and probability. Number and algebra reads horizontally across Representing whole numbers, Combining and separating quantities, and Forming groups. Measurement and space reads horizontally across Geometric measure, 2D spatial structure, 3D spatial structure, and Non-spatial measure. Statistics and probability reads horizontally across Data and Chance.

Figure 2: The organisation of Mathematics 3-6

Image long description: An overview of the syllabus structure for Stages 2 and 3 in Mathematics across the 3 areas of Number and algebra, Measurement and space, and Statistics and probability. Number and algebra reads horizontally across 2 stages - Stage 2 and Stage 3. Stage 2 learning areas include Representing numbers using place value, Additive relations, Multiplicative relations and Partitioned fractions. Stage 3 learning areas include Represents numbers, Additive relations, Multiplicative relations, and Representing quality fractions. Measurement and space reads horizontally across 2 stages - Stages 2 and 3. Learning areas include Geometric measure, 2D spatial structure, 3D spatial structure, and Non-spatial measure. Statistics and probability reads horizontally across 2 stages - Stages 2 and 3. Learning areas include Data and Chance.
K-6 Parts A and B
Mathematics focus areas outline the development of several concepts. In Mathematics K-6, where stages span 2 years of learning (for example, Stage 2 includes Year 3 and Year 4), there are concepts that may need to be addressed earlier or later in the stage.
To assist programming, the content in these focus areas has been separated into 2 parts, A and B, such as in Representing Numbers Using Place Value - A and Representing Numbers Using Place Value - B:
* Part A typically focuses on early concept development
* Part B builds on these early concepts.
The content across Parts A and B relates to the same stage-based outcomes. Teachers can choose which content from Part A and/or Part B to address, based on students' prior learning, needs and abilities.
For example, in Stage 2, Part A does not equate to Year 3 only. When teaching a Year 4 class, the teacher may need to address or consolidate some concepts within Part A prior to addressing concepts in Part B. Similarly, when teaching a Year 3 class, the teacher may decide to address concepts in Part B based on the students' prior learning, needs and abilities.
The Part A and Part B structure of the content:
* provides flexibility for teachers in planning teaching and learning programs based on the needs and abilities of students
* helps to better visualise the progression and growth of concepts within a stage of learning
* makes clear how content builds to support deep understanding in each focus area.
Considerations for planning teaching and learning programs include:
* when students may have learnt some concepts from Part B content in the first year of a stage, consolidation of these concepts in the second year of a stage may be needed
* revisiting concepts regularly to build deeper understanding of mathematical concepts
* providing extension of certain concepts based on students' needs and abilities.
Making connections through related content K-6
Many connections exist between the focus areas in mathematics. Skills and knowledge for focus areas often develop in an interrelated manner and can be addressed in parallel.
Within the context of the syllabus, 'in parallel' means teaching:
* multiple focus areas at the same time
* parallel content in a sequential manner
* application of knowledge, understanding and skills through interrelated focus areas.
Addressing outcomes in parallel enables teachers to efficiently teach and assess essential concepts within the syllabus content while supporting students to make connections with their learning.
Examples of outcomes and content that could be addressed in parallel are identified for each focus area. These are not an exhaustive list of ways that knowledge, understanding and skills are related or can be taught in parallel.
* Making Connections Early Stage 1
* Making Connections Stage 1
* Making Connections Stage 2
* Making Connections Stage 3

Figure 3: The organisation of Mathematics 7-10

Image long description: Stage 4/5 Core: broad outcome groups are Number and finance, Algebra and equations, Ratios and rates, Linear and non-linear relationships, Pythagoras and trigonometry, Length, area and volume, Geometrical properties and figures, Data classification, visualisation and analysis and Probability. Stage 5 Paths: broad outcome groups are Further algebra and equations, Variation and rates of change, Functions and graphs, Further trigonometry, Further area and volume, Geometrical figures and proof, Introduction to networks, Data analysis and statistical enquiry and Further probability. All content is surrounded by the phrase, Working mathematically through communicating reasoning, understanding and fluency, and problem solving.
7-10 Core-Paths structure
The Core-Paths structure is designed to encourage aspiration in students and provide the flexibility needed to enable teachers to create pathways for students working towards Stage 6. The structure is intended to extend students as far along the continuum of learning as possible and provide solid foundations for the highest levels of student achievement. The structure allows for a diverse range of endpoints up to the end of Stage 5.
The Core outcomes provide students with the foundation for Mathematics Standard 2 in Stage 6. Students who require ongoing support in completing all Stage 5 Core outcomes may consider either Mathematics Standard 1 or the Numeracy CEC course in Stage 6. For these students, teachers are encouraged to continue to extend students towards demonstrating achievement in as many Stage 5 Core outcomes as possible. This is to enable as many students as possible to have the knowledge and skills necessary to engage in the highest level of mathematics possible.
The aim for most students is to demonstrate achievement of the Core and as many Path outcomes as possible by the end of Stage 5 and this should guide teacher planning. Allowing time for students to demonstrate understanding of the Core outcomes must be a key consideration.
Typically, the Core will cover teaching and learning experiences up to the middle of Stage 5. It is not the intention of the Core-Paths structure to lock students into predetermined pathways at the end of Stage 4. Pathways in Stage 5 must be carefully planned to ensure some students have the opportunity to engage with Advanced and Extension courses.
Paths are used to progress students towards Stage 6 courses and may be implemented at any time in Stages 4 and 5 with careful consideration of the continuum of learning. Teachers also have the option of engaging with specific elements of Paths rather than the entire outcome to meet the needs of their students. Teachers should plan to cover as many Paths as practicable.
Course requirements K-10
Mandatory curriculum requirements 7-10
The mandatory curriculum requirements for eligibility for the award of the Record of School Achievement (RoSA) include that students:
* study the Board developed Mathematics syllabus substantially in each of Years 7-10 and
* complete at least 400 hours of Mathematics study by the end of Year 10.
Satisfactory completion of at least 200 hours of study in Mathematics during Stage 5 (Years 9 and 10) will be recorded with a grade. Students undertaking the Mathematics course based on Life Skills outcomes and content are not allocated a grade.
Course numbers:
* Mathematics: 326
* Mathematics Life Skills: 327
Exclusions: Students may not access both the Mathematics Years 7-10 outcomes and content and the Mathematics Life Skills outcomes and content.
Access content points K-6
Access content points have been developed to support students with significant intellectual disability who are working towards Early Stage 1 outcomes. These students may communicate using verbal and/or nonverbal forms.
For each of the Early Stage 1 outcomes, access content points are provided to indicate content that students with significant intellectual disability may access as they work towards the outcomes. Teachers will use the access content points on their own, or in combination with the content for each outcome. 
Decisions regarding curriculum options for students with disability should be made in the context of collaborative curriculum planning.
Life Skills outcomes and content 7-10
Students with disability can access the syllabus outcomes and content in a range of ways. Decisions regarding curriculum options should be made in the context of collaborative curriculum planning.
Some students with intellectual disability may find the Years 7-10 Life Skills outcomes and content the most appropriate option to follow in Stage 4 and/or Stage 5. Before determining whether a student is eligible to undertake a course based on Life Skills outcomes and content, consideration should be given to other ways of assisting the student to engage with the Stage 4 and/or Stage 5 outcomes, or prior stage outcomes if appropriate. This assistance may include a range of adjustments to teaching, learning and assessment activities.
Life Skills outcomes cannot be taught in combination with other outcomes from the same subject. Teachers select specific Life Skills outcomes to teach based on the needs, strengths, goals, interests and prior learning of each student. Students are required to demonstrate achievement of one or more Life Skills outcomes.
Balance of content
The amount of content associated with a given outcome is not necessarily indicative of the amount of time spent engaging with the respective outcome. Teachers use formative and summative assessment to determine instructional priorities and the time needed for students to demonstrate expected outcomes.
Working at different stages
The content presented in a stage represents the typical knowledge, understanding and skills that students learn throughout the stage. It is acknowledged that students learn at different rates and in different ways. There may be students who will not demonstrate achievement in relation to one or more of the outcomes for the Stage.
There may be instances where teachers will need to address outcomes across different stages in order to meet the learning needs of students. Teachers are best placed to make decisions about when students need to work at, above or below stage level in relation to one or more of the outcomes. This recognises that outcomes may be achieved by students at different times across stages. Only students who are accelerated in a course may access Stage 6 outcomes.
For example:
* Students in Early Stage 1 could be working on Stage 1 content in the Number and Algebra strand, while working on Early Stage 1 content in the Measurement and Geometry strand.
* In Stage 2 or Stage 3, some students may not have developed a complete understanding of place value and the role of zero to read, write and order two-digit and three-digit numbers. These students will need to access content from Early Stage 1 or Stage 1 before engaging with Stage 2 content in applying place value to larger numbers and decimals.
* In Stage 4 some students may not have developed a complete understanding of fractions, decimals and percentages and will need to access related outcomes from Stage 3.


Rationale
Mathematical ideas have evolved and continue to develop across cultures and have been practised in Australia by Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples for thousands of years. Through the study of mathematics, students apply their knowledge and skills to deepen their understanding of the world.
Mathematics is a reasoning and creative activity, integral to scientific and technological advances across many fields of endeavour. The symbolic nature of mathematics provides a powerful and precise means of communication.
Making connections across mathematical concepts and other subject areas enhances students' ability to understand the purpose of learning mathematics and to develop a deeper conceptual understanding. This helps students to recognise the role of mathematics in solving problems in the world around them, applying their understanding to familiar and unfamiliar situations.
By studying mathematics, students develop essential numeracy skills and fluency, while nurturing the ability to think logically, critically and creatively. They learn about patterns and reason about relationships, creating opportunities to generalise their solutions and to solve non-routine problems.
When students enjoy learning mathematics, they develop a positive self-concept and become self-motivated learners through active participation in appropriately challenging tasks. This can enhance their resilience in solving mathematical problems relevant to further education and their everyday lives.

Aim
The aim of Mathematics K-10 is to enable students to become confident users of mathematics, learning and applying the language of mathematics to communicate efficiently and effectively. They develop an increasingly sophisticated understanding of mathematical concepts and a fluency with mathematical processes that helps them to interpret and solve problems. Students make connections within mathematics and connect mathematical concepts with the world around them. They learn to understand and appreciate how mathematics is a relevant part of their lives.
 
Table of outcomes
Secondary (7-10)
MAO-WM-01 Working mathematically
develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly
This outcome is aligned to all content in each Stage.
Focus areaStage 4Stage 5Related Life Skills for Stages 4/5Computation with integers
MA4-INT-C-01 
compares, orders and calculates with integers to solve problemsNo Stage 5 outcomesMALS-LAN-01 
recognises language that represents number

MALS-LAN-02 
responds to and uses language that represents number

MALS-COU-01 
counts in everyday contexts

MALS-REP-01 
represents number in everyday contexts

MALS-COM-01 
compares and orders numbers

MALS-ADS-01 
uses strategies for addition and subtraction

MALS-MDI-01 
uses strategies for multiplication and divisionFractions, decimals and percentages
MA4-FRC-C-01 
represents and operates with fractions, decimals and percentages to solve problemsNo Stage 5 outcomesMALS-FRC-01 
demonstrates knowledge of fractions in everyday contexts

MALS-DEP-01 
demonstrates knowledge of decimals and percentages in everyday contextsRatios and rates

Includes:

Stage 4: Ratios and rates

Stage 5: Variation and rates of change A (Path)

Stage 5: Variation and rates of change B (Path)

MA4-RAT-C-01 
solves problems involving ratios and rates, and analyses distance-time graphsMA5-RAT-P-01 
identifies and solves problems involving direct and inverse variation and their graphical representations (Path: Stn, Adv)

MA5-RAT-P-02 
analyses and constructs graphs relating to rates of change (Path: Stn, Adv)MALS-ADS-01 
uses strategies for addition and subtraction

MALS-MDI-01 
uses strategies for multiplication and divisionAlgebraic techniques

Includes:

Stage 4: Algebraic techniques

Stage 5: Algebraic techniques A

Stage 5: Algebraic techniques B (Path)

Stage 5: Algebraic techniques C (Path)

MA4-ALG-C-01 
generalises number properties to operate with algebraic expressions including expansion and factorisationMA5-ALG-C-01 
simplifies algebraic fractions with numerical denominators and expands algebraic expressions

MA5-ALG-P-01 
simplifies algebraic fractions involving indices, and expands and factorises algebraic expressions (Path: Adv)

MA5-ALG-P-02 
selects and applies appropriate algebraic techniques to operate with algebraic fractions, and expands, factorises and simplifies algebraic expressions (Path: Adv)MALS-PAT-01 
recognises and applies patterns in everyday contextsIndices

Includes:

Stage 4: Indices

Stage 5: Indices A

Stage 5: Indices B (Path)

Stage 5: Indices C (Path)

MA4-IND-C-01 
operates with primes and roots, positive-integer and zero indices involving numerical bases and establishes the relevant index lawsMA5-IND-C-01 
simplifies algebraic expressions involving positive-integer and zero indices, and establishes the meaning of negative indices for numerical bases

MA5-IND-P-01 
applies the index laws to operate with algebraic expressions involving negative-integer indices (Path: Adv)

MA5-IND-P-02 
describes and performs operations with surds and fractional indices (Path: Adv)No Related Life Skills for Stages 4/5 outcomesEquations

Includes:

Stage 4: Equations

Stage 5: Equations A

Stage 5: Equations B (Path)

Stage 5: Equations C (Path)

MA4-EQU-C-01 
solves linear equations of up to 2 steps and quadratic equations of the form ?ax?^2=cMA5-EQU-C-01 
solves linear equations of up to 3 steps, limited to one algebraic fraction

MA5-EQU-P-01 
solves monic quadratic equations, linear inequalities and cubic equations of the form ?ax?^3=k (Path: Adv)

MA5-EQU-P-02 
solves linear equations of more than 3 steps, monic and non-monic quadratic equations, and linear simultaneous equations (Path: Adv)MALS-ADS-01 
uses strategies for addition and subtraction

MALS-MDI-01 
uses strategies for multiplication and divisionLinear relationships

Includes:

Stage 4: Linear relationships

Stage 5: Linear relationships A

Stage 5: Linear relationships B

Stage 5: Linear relationships C (Path)

MA4-LIN-C-01 
creates and displays number patterns and finds graphical solutions to problems involving linear relationshipsMA5-LIN-C-01 
determines the midpoint, gradient and length of an interval, and graphs linear relationships, with and without digital tools

MA5-LIN-C-02 
graphs and interprets linear relationships using the gradient/slope-intercept form

MA5-LIN-P-01 
describes and applies transformations, the midpoint, gradient/slope and distance formulas, and equations of lines to solve problems (Path: Adv)MALS-POS-01 
demonstrates knowledge of position and direction in everyday contextsLength
MA4-LEN-C-01 
applies knowledge of the perimeter of plane shapes and the circumference of circles to solve problemsNo Stage 5 outcomesMALS-LEN-01 
measures and uses length in everyday contextsPythagoras and trigonometry

Includes:

Stage 4: Right-angled triangles (Pythagoras' theorem)

Stage 5: Trigonometry A

Stage 5: Trigonometry B

Stage 5: Trigonometry C (Path)

Stage 5: Trigonometry D (Path)

MA4-PYT-C-01 
applies Pythagoras' theorem to solve problems in various contextsMA5-TRG-C-01 
applies trigonometric ratios to solve right-angled triangle problems

MA5-TRG-C-02 
applies trigonometry to solve problems, including bearings and angles of elevation and depression

MA5-TRG-P-01 
applies Pythagoras' theorem and trigonometry to solve 3-dimensional problems and applies the sine, cosine and area rules to solve 2-dimensional problems, including bearings (Path: Stn, Adv)

MA5-TRG-P-02 
establishes and applies the properties of trigonometric functions and finds solutions to trigonometric equations (Path: Adv)No Related Life Skills for Stages 4/5 outcomesArea and surface area

Includes:

Stage 4: Area

Stage 5: Area and surface area A

Stage 5: Area and surface area B (Path)

MA4-ARE-C-01 
applies knowledge of area and composite area involving triangles, quadrilaterals and circles to solve problemsMA5-ARE-C-01 
solves problems involving the surface area of right prisms and practical problems involving the area of composite shapes and solids

MA5-ARE-P-01 
applies knowledge of the surface area of right pyramids and cones, spheres and composite solids to solve problems (Path: Stn, Adv)MALS-ARE-01 
measures and uses area in everyday contextsVolume

Includes:

Stage 4: Volume

Stage 5: Volume A

Stage 5: Volume B (Path)

MA4-VOL-C-01 
applies knowledge of volume and capacity to solve problems involving right prisms and cylindersMA5-VOL-C-01 
solves problems involving the volume of composite solids consisting of right prisms and cylinders

MA5-VOL-P-01 
applies knowledge of the volume of right pyramids, cones and spheres to solve problems involving related composite solids (Path: Stn, Adv)MALS-VOL-01 
measures and uses volume, capacity and mass in everyday contextsAngle relationships
MA4-ANG-C-01 
applies angle relationships to solve problems, including those related to transversals on sets of parallel linesNo Stage 5 outcomesNo Related Life Skills for Stages 4/5 outcomesProperties of geometrical figures

Includes:

Stage 4: Properties of geometrical figures

Stage 5: Properties of geometrical figures A

Stage 5: Properties of geometrical figures B (Path)

Stage 5: Properties of geometrical figures C (Path)

MA4-GEO-C-01 
identifies and applies the properties of triangles and quadrilaterals to solve problemsMA5-GEO-C-01 
identifies and applies the properties of similar figures and scale drawings to solve problems

MA5-GEO-P-01 
establishes conditions for congruent triangles and similar triangles and solves problems relating to properties of similar figures and plane shapes (Path: Ext)

MA5-GEO-P-02 
constructs proofs involving congruent triangles and similar triangles and proves properties of plane shapes (Path: Ext)MALS-GEO-01 
explores 2-dimensional shapes and 3-dimensional objectsData classification and visualisation
MA4-DAT-C-01 
classifies and displays data using a variety of graphical representationsNo Stage 5 outcomesMALS-DAT-01 
recognises and represents data in everyday contextsData analysis

Includes:

Stage 4: Data analysis

Stage 5: Data analysis A

Stage 5: Data analysis B

Stage 5: Data analysis C (Path)

MA4-DAT-C-02 
analyses simple datasets using measures of centre, range and shape of the dataMA5-DAT-C-01 
compares and analyses datasets using summary statistics and graphical representations

MA5-DAT-C-02 
displays and interprets datasets involving bivariate data

MA5-DAT-P-01 
plans, conducts and reviews a statistical inquiry into a question of interest (Path: Stn, Adv)MALS-DAT-02 
interprets information from data displaysProbability

Includes:

Stage 4: Probability

Stage 5: Probability A

Stage 5: Probability B (Path)

MA4-PRO-C-01 
solves problems involving the probabilities of simple chance experimentsMA5-PRO-C-01 
solves problems involving probabilities in multistage chance experiments and simulations

MA5-PRO-P-01 
solves problems involving Venn diagrams, 2-way tables and conditional probability (Path: Adv)MALS-PRO-01 
applies chance and probability to everyday eventsFinancial mathematics

Includes:

Stage 5: Financial mathematics A

Stage 5: Financial mathematics B

No Stage 4 outcomesMA5-FIN-C-01 
solves financial problems involving simple interest, earning money and spending money

MA5-FIN-C-02 
solves financial problems involving compound interest and depreciationMALS-FIN-01 
demonstrates knowledge of money in everyday contexts

MALS-FIN-02 
plans and manages personal financesNon-linear relationships

Includes:

Stage 5: Non-linear relationships A

Stage 5: Non-linear relationships B

Stage 5: Non-linear relationships C (Path)

No Stage 4 outcomesMA5-NLI-C-01 
identifies connections between algebraic and graphical representations of quadratic and exponential relationships in various contexts

MA5-NLI-C-02 
identifies and compares features of parabolas and exponential curves in various contexts

MA5-NLI-P-01 
interprets and compares non-linear relationships and their transformations, both algebraically and graphically (Path: Adv)No Related Life Skills for Stages 4/5 outcomesNumbers of any magnitude
No Stage 4 outcomesMA5-MAG-C-01 
solves measurement problems by using scientific notation to represent numbers and rounding to a given number of significant figuresNo Related Life Skills for Stages 4/5 outcomesPolynomials (Path)
No Stage 4 outcomesMA5-POL-P-01 
defines, operates with and graphs polynomials and applies the factor and remainder theorems to solve problems (Path: Adv, Ext)No Related Life Skills for Stages 4/5 outcomesLogarithms (Path)
No Stage 4 outcomesMA5-LOG-P-01 
establishes and applies the laws of logarithms to solve problems (Path: Adv)No Related Life Skills for Stages 4/5 outcomesFunctions and other graphs (Path)
No Stage 4 outcomesMA5-FNC-P-01 
uses function notation to describe and graph functions of one variable and graphs inequalities in one and 2 variables (Path: Adv)No Related Life Skills for Stages 4/5 outcomesCircle geometry (Path)
No Stage 4 outcomesMA5-CIR-P-01 
applies deductive reasoning to prove circle theorems and solve related problems (Path: Ext)No Related Life Skills for Stages 4/5 outcomesIntroduction to networks (Path)
No Stage 4 outcomesMA5-NET-P-01 
solves problems involving the characteristics of graphs/networks, planar graphs and Eulerian trails and circuits (Path: Stn)No Related Life Skills for Stages 4/5 outcomesBefore deciding that a student should undertake a course based on Life Skills outcomes and content, consideration should be given to other ways of assisting the student to engage with the Stage 4 or Stage 5 outcomes. Further information in relation to planning, implementing and assessing Life Skills outcomes and content can be found on the NESA website.

Outcomes and content for Stage 4
Computation with integers
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* compares, orders and calculates with integers to solve problems MA4-INT-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-LAN-01, MALS-LAN-02, MALS-COU-01, MALS-REP-01, MALS-COM-01, MALS-ADS-01, MALS-MDI-01
Content
Compare and order integers
* Recognise and describe the direction and magnitude of integers
Example(s):
Recognising that the temperature on a warm, sunny day is 23 °C while the temperature in the snow is -10 °C.NPV9
* Identify and represent integers on a number line
Example(s):
Using digital tools to identify and record temperatures above and below zero from local Aboriginal Nations and various cities around the world, at a particular point in time.

Using real-life situations to represent positive and negative integers, such as a building with underground parking, sea level or a thermometer.
NPV9
* Compare the relative value of integers using the less than (<) and greater than (>) symbols
Example(s):
Demonstrating that 5>-4 and -5<-1.NPV9
* Order integers
Example(s):
Arranging a set of numbers in descending order and justifying the order using a number line.NPV9
Add and subtract positive and negative integers
* Add and subtract integers with and without the use of digital tools
Example(s):
Using a number line to show that 3+(-5)=-2.


Recognising time zones and calculating the time difference between 2 locations using a number line.AdS10
* Construct a directed number sentence to model a situation
Example(s):
Constructing a directed number sentence for the situation where a student has $10 in their bank account and $12 worth of fees are charged resulting in a balance of negative $2.
* Examine different meanings (position or operation) for the + and - signs, depending on context 
Multiply and divide positive and negative integers
* Represent multiples of negative integers as repeated addition
Example(s):
Considering 4×-3 as (-3)+(-3)+(-3)+(-3) and -4×-3 as -+ [(-3)+(-3)+(-3)+(-3)]¦.

Representing 4×-2 as repeated addition on a number line:

Image long description: Number line demonstrates that 4 multiplied by minus 2 is the same as minus 2, plus minus 2, plus minus 2, plus minus 2.MuS9
* Multiply and divide positive and negative integers with and without the use of digital tools
Example(s):
Considering the outcome of squaring a negative number, and explaining the difference in value of (-4)^2 and -4^2.MuS9
Apply the 4 operations to integers
* Apply the 4 operations to integers
AdS10, MuS9
* Solve problems involving grouping symbols with integers
* Apply the order of operations to evaluate expressions involving integers, with and without the use of digital tools
Example(s):
Evaluating (15 + 9)/6, (15 + 9)/(15 - 3), 5+(18 - 12)/6-12 and 5×(2-8).

Fractions, decimals and percentages
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* represents and operates with fractions, decimals and percentages to solve problems MA4-FRC-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-FRC-01, MALS-DEP-01
Content
Compare fractions using equivalence
* Determine the highest common factor (HCF) of 2 whole numbers
Example(s):
Describing the HCF of 16 and 24 as 8.MuS9
* Examine methods of generating equivalent fractions
Example(s):
Representing  2/3  using an area model and a number line to demonstrate how each diagram can be modified to show the equivalence to  4/6 (halving each unit doubles the number of units).

Image long description: 2 rectangles, one with 2 thirds shaded in and the other with 4 sixths shaded in. Rectangle with 2 thirds shaded. A dotted line divides it into sixths. 2 number lines showing that a third is equal to 2 sixths, and that 2 thirds is equal to 4 sixths.
* Simplify fractions by using methods, including determining the HCF of the numerator and denominator or repeated simplification using common factors
Example(s):
Simplifying 12/16  to  3/4.

* Create fractions with the same denominator to compare their sizes
* Compare and order fractions with different denominators
Example(s):
Comparing the fractions 1/2, 2/3 and 3/8 using digital or concrete manipulatives and putting them in ascending order.
Round decimals to a specified degree of accuracy using approximations
* Round decimals to a given number of decimal places
NPV9
* Apply the notation ˜ as a symbol of numerical approximation
* Reason why an approximation may be more appropriate than an exact answer and vice versa
Example(s):
Explaining that when finding the volume of a cylinder, the exact answer in terms p is not appropriate to estimate the number of 250 mL cups required to fill that cylinder.
Identify terminating and recurring decimals
* Use either dot or vinculum notation for recurring (repeating) decimals
Example(s):
Representing the following using recurring decimal notation: 1/3=0.33333...=0.3 ?,    0.345345345...=0.(345) -,   0.266666...=0.26 ?
* Classify decimals as recurring or terminating
Example(s):
Examine the results of dividing 1 by other single-digit numbers and classify the results as recurring or terminating decimals.
Identify and make use of the relationship between fractions, decimals and percentages to carry out simple conversions
* Define rational numbers as numbers that can be written in the form a/b, where a and b are integers and b?0
Example(s):
Recognising that 2 is a rational number as it can be written as 2/1 and 47% is a rational number as it can be converted to 47/100.
* Classify fractions and percentages as rational numbers
* Recognise and explain that numbers with terminating or recurring decimals are rational
Example(s):
Explaining why decimals such as 0.9 and 0.53535353 ... are rational numbers by first expressing them as fractions 9/10 or 53/99.
* Represent fractions as decimals (terminating and recurring) and percentages
Example(s):
Recognising that  2/3  can be displayed as 0.6666666667 on a calculator.

Using some of the digits from 0 to 9, at most once each, create a true statement of the form:

* Represent terminating decimals as fractions and percentages
* Represent improper fractions as mixed numbers and decimals, and vice versa
* Represent percentages as fractions and decimals
PrT2
Examine the concept of irrational numbers
* Identify and define irrational numbers as numbers that cannot be written in the form a/b where a and b are integers and b?0
Example(s):
Identifying v2 and p as irrational numbers and explaining that 22/7 is an approximation for p.
* Find approximations of irrational numbers using digital tools
* Locate the approximate position of irrational numbers on a number line
Example(s):
Showing the approximate position of p on a number line by choosing an appropriate scale using fractions or decimals.

Demonstrating a method of locating v2 on a number line using compasses or digital tools:

Image long description: Number line between zero and 2. At number one, a vertical line is drawn. A straight, angled line is drawn from zero to the top of the vertical line. A dotted line is drawn from the vertical line to hit the number line at a point between 1 and 2. This point is labelled as the square root of 2.
Order and compare the value of fractions, decimals and percentages
* Locate positive and negative fractions, decimals and mixed numbers on a number line to compare their relative values
Example(s):
Choosing the appropriate scale on a number line to represent -5/6,  7/8  and 1 1/4  .NPV9
* Compare and order fractions, mixed numbers, decimals (terminating and recurring) and percentages
Example(s):
Arranging the following in ascending order: 1/2, 0.35 ?, 75%, 3/5, 17%, 0.02, 1 4/5 and 0.8 by first converting all terms to either a fraction, decimal or percentage.
Solve problems that involve the addition and subtraction of fractions
* Represent addition and subtraction of fractions with the same or unrelated denominators
AdS9, AdS10, InF8
* Solve problems involving adding and subtracting fractions and mixed numbers, including finding a common denominator
Example(s):
Recognising and explaining why  2/3+1/4?3/7.AdS10
* Solve problems that involve subtracting a fraction from a whole number, with and without the use of digital tools
Solve problems that involve the multiplication and division of fractions and decimals
* Compare and generalise the effect of multiplying or dividing by a number with magnitude between zero and one
Example(s):
Explaining why the number 10 gets smaller when multiplied by 1/4.MuS9, InF8
* Represent multiplication and division of decimals
Example(s):
Representing 0.6÷0.2=3.

Image long description: A 10 by 10 square grid with 6 columns shaded divided by a 10 by 10 square grid with 2 columns of the 6 columns shaded equalling a 10 by 10 square grid with 6 columns shaded showing 3 groups of 0.2 in 0.6
* Represent multiplication and division of fractions, including mixed numbers
Example(s):
Representing 1/3×4/5=4/15.

Image long description: A rectangle divided into 3 equal rows with 1 row shaded multiplied by a rectangle divided into 5 equal columns with 4 columns shaded equalling a rectangle divided into 15 equal squares with 4 squares shaded.
* Multiply and divide decimals, using digital tools to solve problems
* Multiply and divide fractions and mixed numbers, with and without using digital tools to solve problems
Example(s):
Evaluating 3 2/5×2 4/7  and   2/9÷1 1/7.MuS10
* Compare initial estimates with the results of calculations
* Apply knowledge of fractions and decimals of quantities to solve problems
Example(s):
Verifying whether 3/7 of $4.50 is a little bit less than half of $4.50.MuS9
* Apply knowledge of multiplication and division of fractions and decimals to solve problems
Example(s):
Creating a true statement with the form below using some of the digits from 1 to 9, without using a digit more than once:
MuS9, MuS10
Represent one quantity as a fraction, decimal or percentage of another, with and without the use of digital tools
* Represent one quantity as a fraction, decimal or percentage of another by considering appropriate units
Example(s):
Examining equivalence in fractions, decimals and percentage forms in the patterns used in textiles, music, designs and/or artworks of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples.InF8
* Calculate percentage increases and decreases in various contexts
Example(s):
Evaluating the final price of a laptop that was selling for $2780 and was reduced by 28% during an online shopping event.PrT6
* Examine the financial applications of percentage increase and decrease, including profit and/or loss as a percentage of cost price or selling price
PrT6, UnM9
Solve problems that involve the use of percentages
* Apply knowledge of percentages to calculate quantities in various contexts
Example(s):
Explaining why multiplying by 1.05 will increase a number/quantity by 5% and multiplying by 0.87 will decrease a number/quantity by 13%.PrT6, PrT2
* Apply knowledge of percentage increases and decreases to solve problems in various contexts
Example(s):
Exploring the situation of increasing an amount by a percentage and decreasing the result by an identical percentage and reasoning why the result is not the original amount.PrT6
* Solve real-life problems involving percentages using the unitary method or other techniques
Example(s):
Examining the percentage of land taken up by particular Aboriginal Nations, such as Bundjalung, Wonnarua, Dunghutti, compared to the total land area of New South Wales.PrT5
* Solve financial problems involving percentages, specifically considering GST, profit and loss
Example(s):
Evaluating the final cost after 10% GST is added to an electrical job that costs $720.PrT6, UnM8, UnM9

Ratios and rates
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* solves problems involving ratios and rates, and analyses distance-time graphs MA4-RAT-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-ADS-01, MALS-MDI-01
Content
Recognise and simplify ratios
* Use ratios to compare 2 or more quantities measured in the same units
PrT3
* Identify and express one part of a ratio as a fraction of the whole
Example(s):
Using a diagram to model the ratio 4:7, showing that the first part is 4/11 of the whole:
PrT3, InF9
* Simplify ratios
PrT5
Solve problems involving ratios
* Apply the unitary method to solve ratio problems
Example(s):
Finding the number of students in Year 7 if there are 105 students in Year 8 and the ratio of Year 7 students to Year 8 students is 4:3:
3 parts = 105
1 part = 105/3
? 4 × 35 = 140 Year 7 students
* Divide a quantity in a given ratio
Example(s):
Dividing $50 in the ratio 1:3.PrT5
* Solve real-life problems involving ratios
Example(s):
Calculating the ingredients needed if a recipe is adjusted for more or less people than the original recommendation.

Calculating the actual distance between Dunghutti Country, South West Rocks and Gumbaynggirr Country, Coffs Harbour, in kilometres if the scale on a map is given as 1:1 000 000 and the distance between the 2 towns on the map is 10 cm.PrT5, PoL5
Recognise and simplify rates
* Explain the differences between ratios and rates
Example(s):
Describing ratios as a comparison of quantities measured in the same units and rates as a comparison of quantities measured in different units.PrT3
* Represent given information as a simplified rate
PrT5
* Convert between units for rates
Example(s):
Converting between km/h and m/s and vice versa.PrT5
Solve problems involving rates
* Solve a variety of real-life problems involving rates
PrT5
* Examine financial applications of rates, such as best buys
PrT5, UnM9
Interpret and construct distance-time graphs from authentic data
* Interpret distance-time graphs made up of straight-line segments with a negative, zero or positive slope
Example(s):
Explaining the significance of horizontal line segments in distance-time graphs.

Interpreting a graph which shows the distance covered and time taken during a car journey of a person and their sibling who leave home to visit their relative's house. After visiting their relative, the person drops off their sibling at a friend's house before going home. Using the below diagram, answer: What is the speed of the car from the person's home to their relative's house? How long did they stay at their relative's house? How far is the friend's house from their home? What is the speed of the car coming home?

Image long description: A graph with distance in kilometres on the vertical axis and time in hours on the horizontal axis. First line slopes upward and travels 50 km in 1 hour. Second line is horizontal for 30 minutes. Third line slopes upward and travels a further 40 km in 30 minutes. Fourth line slopes downward and travels 90 km over 1 hour.IRD6, MeT7
* Calculate speeds for straight-line segments of given distance-time graphs
IRD6, MeT7
* Create distance-time graphs made up of straight-line segments

Algebraic techniques
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* generalises number properties to operate with algebraic expressions including expansion and factorisation MA4-ALG-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-PAT-01
Content
Examine the concept of pronumerals as a way of representing numbers
* Examine and recognise that pronumerals can be used to represent one or more numerical values and when pronumerals have more than one numerical value, they may then be referred to as variables
Example(s):
Explaining that x+3 takes on different values for x=1, x=5, x=10.

Exploring the use of symbols in storytelling by Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples, including mathematical stories.NPA6
* Identify and define an algebraic expression as an expression formed by combining numbers and algebraic symbols using arithmetic operations
Example(s):
Describing 4x-2 and 5(2x+x^2 ) as algebraic expressions.NPA6
* Use concise algebraic notation and conventions for multiplication, division and powers, and explain the meanings for each convention
Example(s):
Representing a÷(b×c) as   a/bc  , a÷b×c as  a/b×c and ac/b , half of x as 1/2 x or x/2, 1×x as x.

4×4=16=4^2, 3×3×3=27=3^3?a×a=a^2, b×b×b=b^3 and c×c×c×c=c^4.NPA6
Create algebraic expressions and evaluate them by substitution
* Generate algebraic expressions by translating descriptions and vice versa
Example(s):
Representing the product of x and y as xy, the quotient when p is divided by q as p/q, the sum of x and y as x+y and the difference between x and y as x-y.

Representing the side length of an equilateral triangle with perimeter 2x+1 as  (2x + 1)/3.NPA6
* Substitute numbers into algebraic expressions and evaluate the result
Example(s):
Evaluating the expression 2l+2b by substituting l=8 and b=3.

Verifying that the expansion of 3x(x-5)=?3x?^2-15x is correct by substituting x=2.NPA6
* Generate a number pattern from an algebraic expression
Example(s):
Generating a number pattern from the algebraic expression x+3 using the table:
NPA6
Extend and apply the laws and properties of arithmetic to algebraic terms and expressions
* Generalise the associative property of addition and multiplication to algebraic expressions
Example(s):
Generalising associativity for numbers such as: (3+5)+2=3+(5+2), to algebraic expressions such as (a+b)+c=a+(b+c), and generalising associativity for numbers such as (3×4)×2=3×(4×2), to algebraic expressions such as (ab)×c=a×(bc)=abc.NPA7
* Generalise the commutative property to algebraic expressions
Example(s):
Generalising commutativity for numbers such as: 3+5=5+3 to algebraic expressions such as a+b=b+a, generalising commutativity for numbers such as 3×4=4×3 to algebraic expressions such as ba = ab.NPA7
* Identify like terms, and add and subtract them to simplify algebraic expressions
NPA7
* Simplify algebraic expressions that involve multiplication and division, including simple algebraic fractions
Example(s):
Simplifying algebraic expressions such as 12a÷3,  4x×3,  2ab×3a,   8a/2 ","    2a/8  and  12a/9.NPA7
* Simplify algebraic expressions involving mixed operations
Example(s):
Simplifying algebraic expressions such as a×4+3÷b-2×a.NPA7
Extend and apply the distributive law to the expansion of algebraic expressions
* Explain the role and meaning of grouping symbols in algebraic expressions
Example(s):
Generalising the distributive law for numbers such as: 3×(20+7)=3×20+3×7 to algebraic expressions such as a(b+c)=ab+ac.

Showing, using an area model, that a(b+c)=ab+ac.
NPA7
* Apply the distributive law to expand and simplify algebraic expressions by removing grouping symbols
Example(s):
Expanding algebraic expressions such as 3(a+2), -5(x+2), a(a+b) and x(-x-2).NPA7
Factorise algebraic expressions by identifying numerical and algebraic factors
* Identify and list factors of a single term
Example(s):
Identifying the factors of 6x as 1, 2, 3, 6, x, 2x, 3x, 6x, -1, -2, -3, -6, -x, -2x, -3x and -6x.
* Factorise algebraic expressions using knowledge of factors and finding the highest common numerical factor (HCF)
Example(s):
Factorising expressions such as 4x-8=4(x-2).NPA7
* Factorise algebraic expressions using knowledge of factors by finding a common algebraic factor, including expressions involving more than 2 terms, and verify the result by expansion
Example(s):
Factorising expressions such as 32y^2-16xy.NPA7

Indices
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* operates with primes and roots, positive-integer and zero indices involving numerical bases and establishes the relevant index laws MA4-IND-C-01
Content
Apply index notation to represent whole numbers as products of powers of prime numbers
* Describe numbers written in index form using terms such as base, power, index and exponent
Example(s):
Representing a number with a base of 5 and an index of 2.
* Represent numbers in index notation limited to positive powers
Example(s):
Expressing 2, 4, 8, 16 and 32 as powers of 2.MuS9
* Represent in expanded form and evaluate numbers expressed in index notation, including powers of 10
Example(s):
Explaining that 10³ = 10 × 10 × 10 = 1000.

Examining and generalising the sign of the result when a negative number is raised to an odd or even power.MuS9
* Apply the order of operations to evaluate expressions involving indices
Example(s):
Evaluating 3^2+4^2 , 4^3+2×5^2.
* Determine and apply tests for divisibility for 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 and 10
Example(s):
Finding the smallest number that is greater than 1000 and is divisible by 6.
* Represent a whole number greater than one as a product of its prime factors, using index notation where appropriate
Example(s):
Representing 324 as 2 × 2 × 3 × 3 × 3 × 3 = 2² × 34.MuS9
Examine cube roots and square roots
* Use the notations for square root (v  ) and cube root (?  ) 
Example(s):
Evaluating ?8 and 3v8 and explaining why they are different.
* Recognise and describe the relationship between squares and square roots, and cubes and cube roots for positive numbers
Example(s):
Deducing that if 7^2=49, then v49=7 and if 5^3=125, then ?125=5.
* Verify, through numerical examples, that vab=va×vb
Example(s):
Showing that if v(9×4)=v36=6 and v9×v4=3×2=6, then v(9×4)=v9×v4.
* Estimate the square root of any non-square whole number and the cube root of any non-cube whole number, then check using a calculator
Example(s):
Estimating the value of v30 by first considering that it lies between v25 and v36 .

Creating a true statement with the smallest possible interval of the form: ?.??<v6<?.?? using the digits 1 to 6, at most one time each.
* Identify and describe exact and approximate solutions in the context of square roots and cube roots
* Apply the order of operations to evaluate expressions involving square roots, cube roots, square numbers and cube numbers
Example(s):
Finding the missing numbers to make the number sentence true: [?3×??^2+(v25-?)]=v(?)×9×3-5.
Use index notation to establish the index laws with positive-integer indices and the zero index
* Establish the multiplication, division and the power of a power index laws, by expressing each number in expanded form with numerical bases and positive-integer indices
Example(s):
Recognising that 3^2×3^4=(3×3)×(3×3×3×3)=3^6=3^(2 + 4), and generalising this into the form a^m×a^n=a^(m + n).

Recognising that 3^5÷3^2=(3 × 3 × 3 × 3 × 3)/(3 × 3)=3^3=3^(5 - 2), and generalising this into the form a^m÷a^n=a^(m - n).

Recognising that (3^4 )^2=3^4×3^4=3×3×3×3×3×3×3×3=3^8,  and generalising this into the form (a^m )^n=a^(m × n).
* Verify through numerical examples that (ab)^2=a^2 b^2
* Establish the meaning of the zero index
Example(s):
Establishing the meaning of the zero index using index laws such as: 5^2/5^2 =25/25=1, and 5^2/5^2 =5^(2 - 2)=5^0, ?5^0=1.

Exploring the pattern 2^4, 2^3, 2^2, 2^1, 2^0.
* Apply index laws to simplify and evaluate expressions with numerical bases
Example(s):
Evaluating 5^2×5^4×5, 4^6÷4^3×4^2 and (4^0×3^3÷3^4 )^2.

Equations
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* solves linear equations of up to 2 steps and quadratic equations of the form ?ax?^2=c MA4-EQU-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-ADS-01, MALS-MDI-01
Content
Solve linear equations up to 2 steps
* Represent number sentences involving unknown quantities using pronumerals
Example(s):
Explore how Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples may use storytelling and/or dance to represent mathematical equations.NPA6, NPA7
* Describe number sentences as equations
* Distinguish between and compare algebraic expressions and equations
NPA7
* Solve linear equations with integer and non-integer solutions using algebraic techniques that involve up to 2 steps, including equations with pronumerals on both sides
Example(s):
Solving 2x+5=20, 8-3x=-20, 23=x/3+26, (x + 4)/3=2  and 2x+3=4x.
* Model and solve word problems using equations of up to 2 steps
NPA7
Solve and verify linear equations by substitution
* Verify solutions to equations by substitution
Example(s):
Verifying that x=7.5 is a solution by substituting in the equation 2x/3+5=10.
LHS=(2×7.5)/3+5
=15/3+5
=5+5
=10
=RHSNPA6
* Solve problems involving linear equations, including those arising from substituting given values into formulas
Example(s):
Recognising that 2 consecutive integers can be represented as x and x+1, and use these to find 2 consecutive integers that have a sum of 23.

Finding the value of t in the formula v=u+at if v=10, u=3 and a=2.

Finding the value of x if a rectangle with length (2x-1) cm and width 3 cm has an area of 39 cm2.NPA7, NPA8
Solve quadratic equations
* Reason why there are 2 values of x that satisfy a quadratic equation of the form x^2=c if c>0
Example(s):
Evaluating 3^2 and (-3)^2  and solving x^2=9 and explaining why there is no solution to x^2=-9.
* Solve problems involving quadratic equations of the form ax^2=c, giving answers in exact form and as decimal approximations
Example(s):
Explaining that if x^2=5, then x can be expressed in exact form as x=±v5 or as a decimal approximation as x˜±2.24 to 2 decimal places.
* Solve quadratic equations arising from substitution into a formula
Example(s):
Finding the value of r in the formula A=?pr?^2 if A=10.NPA8

Linear relationships
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* creates and displays number patterns and finds graphical solutions to problems involving linear relationships MA4-LIN-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-POS-01
Content
Plot and identify points on the Cartesian plane
* Plot and label points on the Cartesian plane of given coordinates, including those with coordinates that are not whole numbers
Example(s):
Plotting and labelling the points P(1/3, -2) and Q(-3.5,0) on the Cartesian plane.

Aboriginal art uses topographical views to map Country. Use a topographical map of the local region to identify coordinates of landmarks such as watering holes, cultural places or places of personal significance.NPA8
* Identify and record the coordinates of given points on the Cartesian plane, including those with coordinates that are not whole numbers
Example(s):
Using the diagram of the Cartesian plane to identify the coordinates of point A, naming the point at (4, -2 1/2), labelling point Z on the x-axis directly above point C, and identifying the coordinates of the point  2 1/2 units left of the origin.

Image long description: A number plane with an x and y-axis. Point A is plotted at 2, 1.5. Point B is plotted at 4, minus 2.5. Point C at minus 2.5, minus 1.5PoL5
Plot linear relationships on the Cartesian plane
* Construct a geometric pattern and record the results in a table of values
Example(s):
Representing the pattern below made from matches in a table of values:

Image long description: The number of pentagons is measured against the number of matches used to make the pentagon pattern, represented in a table. The table shows the number of pentagons on the top row (1, 2, 3, 4) and the corresponding number of matches on the bottom row (5, 9, blank, 17).
* Represent a given number pattern (including decreasing patterns) using a table of values
NPA5
* Describe a number pattern in words and generate an equation using algebraic symbols
Example(s):
Describing a number pattern as: the y-value is double the x-value, and generalising the equation to be y=2x.NPA7
* Apply an equation generated from a pattern to calculate the corresponding value for a smaller or larger number
Example(s):
Generating the equation for the pattern and completing the table of values.

Image long description: A table with x-values on the top row (1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 8, 95) and y"-" values on the bottom row (minus 13, minus 15 and minus 17). The remaining values for y are left blank.NPA7
* Recognise that a linear relationship can be represented by a number pattern, an equation (or a rule using algebraic symbols), a table of values, a set of pairs of coordinates and a line graphed on a Cartesian plane, and move flexibly between these representations
Example(s):
Deriving the equation representing the relationship between x and y by completing a table of values for the set of points shown in the diagram.
NPA7, NPA8
* Explain that there are an infinite number of ordered pairs that satisfy a given linear relationship by extending a line joining a set of points on the Cartesian plane
* Compare similarities and differences of multiple straight-line graphs on the same set of axes using graphing applications
Example(s):
Using digital tools to graph y=x+1, y=x-2 and y=-2x+1 on the same Cartesian plane, identifying similarities and differences such as parallel, non-parallel, pass through the same point, increasing and decreasing.
* Describe linear relationships in real-life contexts and solve related problems
Example(s):
Demonstrating a linear relationship using a graph for a situation where an electrician charges a $75 call-out fee and $60 for each hour it takes to complete a job.NPA8, IRD6
Solve linear equations using graphical techniques
* Recognise that each point on the graph of a linear relationship satisfies the equation of a line
Example(s):
Verifying that the points (2, 5) and (-1, -1) satisfy the line y=2x+1.
* Apply graphs of linear relationships to solve a corresponding linear equation using graphing applications
Example(s):
Using the graph of y=2x+3 to find the solution to the equation 2x+3=11.
IRD6
* Graph 2 intersecting lines on the same set of axes and identify the point of intersection using either graphing applications or a table of values
Example(s):
Graphing the linear equations y=2x+1 and y=-x+4 and identifying their point of intersection.

* Verify that the point of intersection satisfies the equations of both lines

Length
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* applies knowledge of the perimeter of plane shapes and the circumference of circles to solve problems MA4-LEN-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-LEN-01
Content
Solve problems involving the perimeter of various quadrilaterals and simple composite figures
* Solve problems involving the perimeter of plane shapes, including parallelograms, trapeziums, rhombuses and kites
Example(s):
Finding the perimeter of irregular plane shapes such as:
UuM7, UGP6
* Solve problems relating to the perimeter of simple composite figures
UuM7, UGP6
* Compare methods of solution for finding perimeter and evaluate the efficiency of those methods
Example(s):
Analysing different ways a perimeter could be found.

Image long description: The composite shape is a rectangle with a section missing. The intact height of the shape is labelled 10 and the width is labelled 12. The missing section height is 4 and the width 5. The first way to find the perimeter is to extend the missing section's height and width to create the equation: 12 plus 10, plus 12, plus 10 equals 44. The second way to find the perimeter is to subtract the missing section's height and width from the rectangle's height and width to find the length of the shortened sides, and add this to the height and width of the rectangle and missing sections. This forms the equation: 12 plus 10, plus 6, plus 5, plus 4, plus 7 equals 44.
Describe the relationships between the features of circles
* Identify and describe the relationship between circle features, including the radius, diameter, arc, chord, sector and segment of a circle, and a tangent to a circle
* Define p as the ratio of the circumference to the diameter of any circle
Example(s):
Comparing values for the ratio of the circumference to the diameter by measuring the diameter and circumference of a variety of circles and/or cylinders.UuM9
* Verify that the number p is a constant and develop the formula for the circumference of a circle
UuM9
* Apply the formula for the circumference of a circle in terms of the diameter d or radius r (circumference of a circle =pd or 2pr) to solve related problems to solve related problems
Example(s):
Calculating the inner circumference of several yidakis (didgeridoos) and examining how the inner circumference affects the sound produced.UuM9, NPA8, UGP6
* Establish the arc length formula (l=?/360×2pr) where l is the arc length and ? is the angle subtended at the centre by the arc
UuM9, NPA8, UGP6
* Solve problems by finding arc lengths and the perimeter of sectors, giving an exact answer in terms of p or an approximate answer
Example(s):
Calculating the approximate distance between 2 locations on the equator using an assumed value for the Earth's radius.UuM9, NPA8, UGP6
* Find the perimeter of quadrants, semicircles and simple composite figures consisting of 2 shapes in a variety of contexts, including using digital tools
Example(s):
Using online mapping applications to calculate the perimeter of places of interest, such as a local running track or botanical garden.UuM9, NPA8, UGP6

Right-angled triangles (Pythagoras' theorem)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* applies Pythagoras' theorem to solve problems in various contexts MA4-PYT-C-01
Content
Identify and define Pythagoras' theorem
* Identify and describe the hypotenuse as the side opposite the right angle and the longest side in any right-angled triangle
Example(s):
Analysing right-angled triangles of differing sizes and orientations and identifying the hypotenuse.UGP6
* Establish the relationship between the lengths of the sides of a right-angled triangle
Example(s):
Rearranging 4 congruent right-angled triangles of side lengths a, b and c to form a square with a side length a+b and establishing the relationship between the lengths of the sides of a right-angled triangle.

Image long description: The first square has a side length of a plus b, and has a square of side length c at a diagonal rotation inside it. The second square represents how this creates a square of side length a plus b, with 2 identical rectangles of diagonal length c and squares of side length a and side length b inside the larger square. UGP6, NPA6
* Use the relationship to record and define Pythagoras' theorem both algebraically and in words
UGP6, NPA8
Examine problems involving Pythagoras' theorem
* Apply Pythagoras' theorem to find the unknown length of a side in a right-angled triangle, giving answers in an exact form or as decimal approximations
Example(s):
Reasoning why the negative solution of the relevant quadratic equation is not feasible when solving problems involving Pythagoras' theorem.NPA8, UuM10, UGP7
* Apply the converse of Pythagoras' theorem to establish whether a triangle is right angled
Example(s):
Justifying that a triangle with side lengths of 5 m, 12 m and 13 m is right-angled.UGP6
* Solve practical problems involving Pythagoras' theorem before exploring a variety of related problems
Example(s):
Exploring the possible areas of a rhombus with a side length of 8 cm and one diagonal length of 15 cm.NPA8, UuM10, UGP7
* Justify whether a set of 3 integers is a Pythagorean triad
UGP7

Area
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* applies knowledge of area and composite area involving triangles, quadrilaterals and circles to solve problems MA4-ARE-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-ARE-01
Content
Develop and use formulas to find the area of rectangles, triangles and parallelograms to solve problems
* Apply the formula to find the area of a rectangle or square: A=lb, where l is the length and b is the breadth (or width) of the rectangle or square
Example(s):
Comparing various rectangles with the same area and examining whether they have the same perimeter, such as finding the possible perimeters of all rectangles with integer side lengths that have an area of 36 cm2.UuM8, NPA8
* Develop and apply the formula to find the area of a triangle: A= 1/2 bh, where b is the base length and h is the perpendicular height
Example(s):
Verifying the formula for the area of a triangle by folding a rectangle in half to see that the area of the triangle is half that of the rectangle.

Identifying the perpendicular height of triangles in different orientations and verifying that triangles with the same base length and height have equal areas by using digital tools.
UuM8
* Develop and apply the formula to find the area of a parallelogram: A= bh where b is the base length and h is the perpendicular height
Example(s):
Developing the formula for the area of a parallelogram by either rotating a right-angled triangle or bisecting a pair of opposite sides of a parallelogram and rotating the triangles to form a rectangle.

Image long description: A parallelogram showing perpendicular height h and side length b, transformed into a rectangle by using the perpendicular height as the width of the rectangle, and the length of the parallelogram as the length of the rectangle.

Image long description: A parallelogram transformed into a rectangle, demonstrating how a triangle on the edge of the parallelogram can be flipped to form a rectangle of the same dimensions.UuM9, NPA8
* Calculate the area of composite figures that can be dissected into rectangles, squares, parallelograms or triangles to solve problems
Example(s):
Exploring different ways to find composite areas.

Image long description: The first diagram shows that the composite shape is 2 rectangles. The large rectangle has a width of 6 and length of 12, the other has a width of 4 and length of 7. They are joined together so the shape is a rectangle with a corner missing. The second diagram shows that the area can be found by first finding the total area of the shape and subtracting the missing section with the equation: 12 multiplied by 10, minus 4 multiplied by 5. The third diagram shows that the area can be found by adding the total areas of the 2 rectangles when split horizontally. The equation is 7 multiplied by 4, plus 12 multiplied by 6. The fourth diagram shows that the area can be found by adding the total areas of the 2 rectangles when split vertically. The equation is 10 multiplied by 7, plus 6 multiplied by 5.UuM10
Develop and use the formula to find the area of circles and sectors to solve problems
* Develop and apply the formula to find the area of a circle: A=pr^2, where r is the length of the radius
Example(s):
Developing the formula to find the area of a circle by dissecting a circle into many congruent sectors and arranging them to form an approximate parallelogram with height r and base pr and considering the area of the parallelogram.

Image long description: A circle is broken up into 8 sectors which are placed together to create the third shape. The second shape is created using 32 sectors of the same circle arranged in a tight line to indicate how the smaller the size of the sectors, the closer the shape becomes to a parallelogram.UuM9, NPA8
* Explain how the area of a sector can be developed from the area of a circle (A=?/360×pr^2 )
UuM9, NPA8
* Find the area of quadrants, semicircles and sectors, and apply these formulas in the context of real-life problems
Example(s):
Measuring and calculating the area inside the 3-point line of a basketball court.UuM9, NPA8, UGP6
* Calculate the areas of composite shapes involving quadrants, semicircles and sectors to solve problems
UuM9, NPA8, UGP6
Develop and use the formulas to find the area of trapeziums, rhombuses and kites to solve problems
* Develop and apply the formula to find the area of a kite or rhombus: A=1/2 xy, where x and y are the lengths of the diagonals
Example(s):
Developing the area of a rhombus or kite by dividing the shape on the diagonals into 2 or 4 right-angled triangles:


A=4×1/2  ×1/2 x ×  1/2 y=  1/2 xy
Image long description: Demonstration of how a rhombus with one diagonal measuring x and one diagonal measuring y becomes a triangle with perpendicular height y over 2 and base length x.UuM9, NPA8
* Develop and apply the formula to find the area of a trapezium: A=h/2 (a+b), where h is the perpendicular height and a and b are the lengths of parallel sides
Example(s):
Developing the formula for the area of a trapezium by bisecting the non-parallel sides, dissecting the trapezium and rotating triangles to form a rectangle with the same perpendicular height and length as half of the sum of the 2 parallel sides.

Image long description: Trapezium with parallel sides a and b, and perpendicular height h. Triangles on either end are flipped upwards to form a rectangle with side length of a half multiplied by a plus b, and width h.UuM9, NPA8
* Calculate the area of composite shapes involving trapeziums, kites and rhombuses to solve problems
UuM9, NPA8, UGP6
Choose appropriate units of measurement for area and convert between units
* Choose an appropriate unit to measure the area of different shapes and surfaces, and justify the choice
Example(s):
Examining the suitability of units relative to the size of an object, based on real-life scenarios such as the area of a paddock in hectares, the area of a local botanical garden in km2 or the floor space of a hall in m2.
* Convert between metric units of area using ?1 cm?^2=100 mm^2, 1 m^2=10 000 cm^2, 1 ha=10 000 m^2 and 1 km^2=1 000 000 m^2=100 ha
Example(s):
Representing conversions using areas of squares.

Image long description: The first square has sides of 10 millimetres with an area of 100 square millimetres. It is equal to the second square that has sides of 1 centimetre and an area of 1 square centimetre. The third square has sides of 100 centimetres and an area of 10 000 square centimetres. It is equal to the fourth square with sides of 1 metre and an area of 1 square metre.UuM8

Volume
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* applies knowledge of volume and capacity to solve problems involving right prisms and cylinders MA4-VOL-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-VOL-01
Content
Describe the different views of prisms and solids that have been formed from prism combinations
* Represent prisms from different views in 2 dimensions, including top, side, front and back views
UGP5
* Describe and illustrate solids formed from prism combinations from different views in 2 dimensions, including top, side, front and back views
Example(s):
Illustrating different perspectives of solids consisting of combinations of prisms created using digital tools or concrete materials.UGP5
* Identify and illustrate the cross-sections of different prisms
UGP5
* Examine the idea that prisms have a uniform cross-section that is equal to the base area
UGP5
* Determine if a particular solid has a uniform cross-section
UGP5
Develop and apply the formula to find the volume of a prism to solve problems
* Develop the formula for the volume of a prism: V=base area×height, leading to V=Ah 
UuM9
* Apply the formula for the volume of a prism to prisms with uniform cross-sections to solve problems
Example(s):
Calculating the side length of a cube with a volume of 125 cm3.UuM9, NPA8, UGP6
Develop the formula for finding the volume of a cylinder and apply the formula to solve problems
* Develop and apply the formula to solve problems involving the volume of cylinders:  V=pr^2 h, where r is the length of the radius of the base and h is the perpendicular height
Example(s):
Developing the formula for finding the volume of a cylinder by recognising repeated layers of circles.

Calculating the volume of wood eaten by termites to create an emu caller (hollow cylinder) assuming they are perfect cylinders.UuM9, NPA8
Choose appropriate units of measurement for volume and capacity and convert between units
* Recognise that 1000 L is equal to 1 kilolitre (kL) and use the abbreviation
UuM8
* Recognise that 1000 kL is equal to 1 megalitre (ML) and use the abbreviation
Example(s):
Recognising the use of kL and ML in estimating the volume of real-life situations such as Sydney Harbour, a local dam or a backyard swimming pool.UuM8
* Choose an appropriate unit to measure the volume or capacity of different objects and justify the choice
Example(s):
Identifying the most appropriate units to measure the capacity of a swimming pool or a fish tank.

Using the capacities of familiar containers to help estimate the capacity of larger containers.
* Convert between metric units of volume and capacity ("1 " ?"cm" ?^"3 "  "= 1000" ?" mm" ?^"3" , "1 " ?"cm" ?^"3"  " = 1 mL" , "1" ?" m" ?^"3"  " = 1000 L = 1 kL" , "1000 kL = 1 ML" ) 
UuM8, UuM10
* Solve practical problems involving the volume and capacity of right prisms and cylinders
Example(s):
Given the volume of carrying tools used by Aboriginal Peoples, demonstrate how to estimate their capacity and explore the maximum number of objects they can hold.

Comparing the capacity of a cubic tank with the dimensions 1.5 "m"  ×1.5 "m"  × 1.5 "m"  to a cylindrical tank 1.6 m in diameter and with a height of 1.6 m.UuM9, NPA8, UGP6

Angle relationships
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* applies angle relationships to solve problems, including those related to transversals on sets of parallel lines MA4-ANG-C-01
Content
Apply the language, notation and conventions of geometry
* Use appropriate terminology and conventions to define, label and name points, rays, lines and intervals using capital letters
Example(s):
Describing the similarities and differences between the following examples:

Image long description: The first diagram is a ray starting at point A and continuing through point B. The second diagram shows an interval of a line starting at point A and ending at point B. The third shows a line that goes through points A and B and continues through both.
* Identify and label the vertex and arms of an angle with capital letters
* Use appropriate conventions to label and name angles
Example(s):

* Use common conventions to indicate right angles, equal angles and intervals on diagrams
Example(s):

Image long description: The first diagram is a right angle through the points ABC. The second diagram has one isosceles triangle inside another isosceles triangle showing equal sides and equal base angles.
Identify geometrical properties of angles at a point
* Identify right angles, straight angles, angles of complete revolution and vertically opposite angles
UuM8
* Apply the terms complementary and supplementary to a pair of angles adding to 90°and 180°, respectively
Example(s):
Identifying complementary and supplementary angles arising from right angles and straight angles. ?ABC and ?CBD are complementary since ?ABD is a right angle.  ?FHG and ?JHG are supplementary since ?FHJ is a straight angle.

Image long description: The first diagram shows right angle ABD dissected by line BC forming complementary angles. The second diagram shows straight angle FHJ with line GH in the middle at a diagonal forming supplementary angles.UGP5
* Apply the term adjacent angles to a pair of angles with a common arm and common vertex
Example(s):
?ADC is adjacent to ?BDC and reflex ?ADB.

Identify and describe corresponding, alternate and co-interior angles when 2 straight lines are crossed by a transversal, including parallel lines
* Identify and describe perpendicular lines using the symbol for is perpendicular to (?)
UuM8, UGP6
* Apply the common conventions to indicate parallel lines on diagrams
Example(s):

* Identify and describe pairs of parallel lines using the symbol for is parallel to (?)
UGP6
* Identify and define transversals, including transversals of parallel lines
Example(s):
Transversal XY cuts the lines AB and CD at Z and W.

* Identify, name and measure alternate angle pairs, corresponding angle pairs and co-interior angle pairs for 2 lines cut by a transversal
Example(s):
UGP6
* Verify and identify corresponding angles and alternate angles as equal, and co-interior angles as supplementary, when a pair of parallel lines is cut by a transversal
Example(s):

Image long description: A corresponding angle and alternate interior angles where angle a and angle b are equal. A co-interior angle where angle a plus angle b equals 180 degrees.UGP6
* Justify that 2 lines are parallel by using properties of alternate, corresponding or co-interior angles on parallel lines
UGP6
Solve numerical problems involving angles using reasoning
* Apply the knowledge of angle relationships including angles at a point to find the sizes of unknown angles embedded in diagrams and give reasons
Example(s):
Finding the size of the unknown angle and give reasons:


x+162°+90°+78°=360° (angles at a point)
?x=30°
y=53° (vertically opposite angles)UGP5, NPA6
* Apply the knowledge of angles associated with parallel lines to find the sizes of unknown angles embedded in related diagrams and give reasons
Example(s):
If ?BCH=114°, find the size of ?ABF and ?EBC and give reasons.


Finding the value of x in the diagram below and give reasons:

Construct a line XY through X parallel to AB and CD.
63^°+?AXY=180^° (co-interior angles, AB?XY)
??AXY=117^°
Similarly, ?YXC+42^°=180^°
??YXC=138^° 
x+117^°+138^°=360^° (angles at a point)
?x=105^°UGP6, NPA6

Properties of geometrical figures
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* identifies and applies the properties of triangles and quadrilaterals to solve problems MA4-GEO-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-GEO-01
Content
Classify triangles according to their side and angle properties
* Label triangles using appropriate text and symbols
Example(s):
Triangle ABC can be written as ?ABC.
* Classify and describe types of triangles based on their properties, including acute-angled, right-angled, obtuse-angled, equilateral, isosceles and scalene triangles
Example(s):
Recognising that a given triangle may belong to more than one class such as right-angled scalene triangles and obtuse-angled isosceles triangles.UGP6
Classify quadrilaterals and describe their properties
* Identify quadrilaterals using naming conventions
Example(s):
Recognising that quadrilateral ABCD is the same as ADCB but not the same as ACBD.
UGP4
* Distinguish between convex and non-convex quadrilaterals
Example(s):
Non-convex (also called concave) quadrilaterals have one internal reflex angle.
UGP4
* Verify and describe the properties of the special quadrilaterals which include parallelograms, rectangles, rhombuses, squares, trapeziums and kites
Example(s):
Properties of special quadrilaterals:
Opposite sides are parallel.
Opposite sides are equal.
Adjacent sides are perpendicular.
Opposite angles are equal.
Diagonals are equal.
Diagonals bisect each other.
Diagonals bisect each other at right angles.
Diagonals bisect the angles of the quadrilateral.UGP4
* Identify and label the properties of the special quadrilaterals using appropriate conventions
UGP4
* Classify quadrilaterals based on their properties
UGP4
* Justify why some quadrilaterals may be classified as more than one type of quadrilateral
UGP4
Apply the properties of triangles and quadrilaterals
* Prove that the interior angle sum of a triangle is 180° with or without digital tools
Example(s):
Proving the interior angle sum of a triangle is 180°:

Construct DE parallel to BC.
?DAB=?ABC=a (alternate angles, DE?BC)
?EAC=?BCA=ß (alternate angles, DE?BC)
a+ß+?=180^° (straight angle)
??ABC+?BCA+?CAB=180^°
Image long description: Triangle ABC with interior angles alpha, beta and gamma. Line DE is constructed parallel to BC at point A forming a straight angle of alpha, gamma and beta with a sum of 180 degrees.UGP6
* Prove that any exterior angle of a triangle equals the sum of the 2 interior opposite angles
UGP6
* Apply the angle sum of a triangle to prove that the angle sum of a quadrilateral is 360°
UGP6
* Apply the properties of triangles and quadrilaterals to determine unknown sides and angles to solve problems, giving reasons
Example(s):
Finding the value of x given PQRS is a parallelogram:

QR?PS (opposite sides of a parallelogram are parallel)
x+53^°=180^° (co-interior angles are supplementary, QR?PS)
?x=127^°UGP6, NPA6

Data classification and visualisation
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* classifies and displays data using a variety of graphical representations MA4-DAT-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-DAT-01
Content
Classify data as either numerical (discrete or continuous) or categorical (nominal or ordinal) variables
* Define a variable in the context of statistics as any characteristic, number or quantity that can be measured or counted
* Classify and describe variables as numerical or categorical
* Describe a numerical variable as either discrete or continuous
Example(s):
Discrete (number of students, shoe size) and continuous (height, weight).IRD4
* Describe a categorical variable as nominal or ordinal
Example(s):
Nominal (blue, green, yellow) and ordinal (small, medium, large).IRD3
* Distinguish between and compare numerical (discrete or continuous) and categorical (nominal or ordinal) variables
IRD4
Display data using graphical representations relevant to the purpose of the data
* Represent single datasets using graphs, including frequency histograms and polygons, dot plots, stem-and-leaf plots, divided bar graphs, column graphs, line graphs, sector graphs and pictograms, with or without digital tools
Example(s):
Using data from various sources, examine population characteristics of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples across all states and territories. Use various data representations to highlight changes over time.IRD3, IRD4
* Include sources, titles, labels and scales when displaying data in a graph
Example(s):
The source indicates where the data was collected, the title introduces the data in the graph, the labels identify each axis and scales identify the possible values of a variable along an axis.IRD3, IRD4
* Select the type of graph best suited to represent various single datasets and justify the choice of graph
Example(s):
Comparing the characteristics of histograms and column graphs and justifying their use for datasets.

Image long description: A histogram graph with dashes along the vertical axis and the bars close together. 2 column graphs, one with dashes along the vertical axis and another with dashes along the horizontal axis. The bars follow the direction of the dashes and have spaces between them.IRD3, IRD4
* Represent a dataset using a statistical infographic and justify the choice of graphical representation used
Example(s):
Creating a statistical infographic showing information about Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples. Information could include data from the most recent census indicating changes over time in the Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander population.

Using a statistical infographic to enhance retention and recall of information through visually compelling charts.
IRD6
Interpret data in graphical representations
* Identify and interpret data displayed on graphs
Example(s):
Identifying variables from a histogram, dot plot, stem-and-leaf plot, bar graph, line graph, sector graph and pictogram, interpret the data.IRD3, IRD4
* Identify features of graphical representations to draw conclusions
IRD6
* Interpret patterns in graphical representations to make predictions
IRD6
* Explain why a given graphical representation can lead to a misinterpretation of data
Example(s):
Examining the graphical representation of the cost of services over many years and concluding that the increase in cost of services in Year 4 is much greater than that in Year 3 due to a larger prism.

Image long description: Example of a misleading graph depicting cost of services plotted against time in years. Three-dimensional columns have non-uniform values and continue to increase in size as time progresses.IRD4

Data analysis
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* analyses simple datasets using measures of centre, range and shape of the data MA4-DAT-C-02
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-DAT-02
Content
Calculate and compare the mean, median, mode and range for simple datasets
* Calculate the mean (x-?) of a set of data using digital tools
Example(s):
Using the statistical functions of a spreadsheet or another digital tool to determine the mean for both small and large datasets.IRD5
* Calculate and describe the mean, median, mode and range of a dataset
IRD5
* Classify the mean, median and/or mode as measure(s) of centre to represent the average or typical value of a dataset
IRD5
* Describe and interpret data displays using mean, median and range
Example(s):
Calculating measures of centre and range and using these to describe and interpret data represented in a variety of statistical displays, including frequency distribution tables, histograms, stem-and-leaf plots and dot plots.IRD5
* Identify and describe datasets as having no modes (uniform), one mode (unimodal), 2 modes (bimodal) or multiple modes (multimodal)
Example(s):
Identifying which of the following diagrams is closest to a uniform distribution:

* Identify the range as a measure of spread to describe variation in a dataset
IRD5
* Compare simple datasets using the mean, median, mode and range
IRD5
Interpret the effect individual data points have on measures of centre and range
* Informally identify clusters, gaps and outliers in datasets and give reasons for their occurrence in the context of the data
Example(s):
Identifying and describing outliers informally from statistical displays and exploring the reasons why these might occur.IRD6
* Identify and explain the impact of adding or removing data values that are clustered at one end of a dataset on the measures of centre
Example(s):
Justifying why adding a score of 12 to the set of scores 2, 3, 4, 5, 5, 5, 6, 8 will not change the mode of 5.

Explaining the effect on the mean if a score of 99% is added to a set of 20 test scores with an average of 60%.IRD6
* Identify and explain the impact of outliers on the measures of centre and range
Example(s):
Analysing why it is more appropriate to use the median than the mean when the data contains one or more outliers.IRD6
* Determine and justify the most appropriate measure of centre to summarise the data in its context
Example(s):
Using the median as the appropriate measure of centre to determine the average house price in a suburb to avoid distortion of the data by outliers. Using the mean to determine the average test score in a mathematics test when most of the marks are close together.IRD6
Analyse datasets presented in various ways and draw conclusions
* Identify and describe the shape and distribution of a dataset using the terms symmetrical, negatively skewed and positively skewed
Example(s):

* Define a census as a study of every unit, everyone or everything in a population
* Define a sample as a subset of units in a population selected to represent all units in a population of interest
IRD7
* Draw conclusions and make informed decisions about data gathered using data-collection techniques, including census and sampling, which is then presented in tables, graphs and charts
Example(s):
Identifying and describing factors that may have masked results, analysing the accuracy of measurements taken, and determining whether the outcomes of the study can be generalised to other situations.IRD6, IRD7

Probability
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* solves problems involving the probabilities of simple chance experiments MA4-PRO-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-PRO-01
Content
Determine probabilities for chance experiments
* List the sample space for chance experiments
Example(s):
Explaining that if a standard 6-sided die is rolled once, the sample space (S) is S = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6}.

Explaining that the sample space for a spinner with 6 equal segments, 2 of which are red, 3 are green and 1 is white is S={R, G, W}.
* Express the probability of an event, which has a finite number of equally likely outcomes, as P(event)=number of favourable outcomes/total number of outcomes 
Example(s):
Representing the probability of rolling a 4 on a 6-sided die as P(4)=1/6.

The probability of landing on green using a spinner with 6 equal segments, 2 of which are red, 3 are green and 1 is white is P("G" )=3/6.
* Recognise that probabilities range from 0 (impossible) to 1 (certain) and that equally likely outcomes have equal probabilities
* Verify that the total of the probabilities of all possible outcomes of an event is 1
UnC5
* Identify and describe theoretical (expected) probabilities as being the likelihood of outcomes occurring under fair or unbiased conditions
* Explain that observed probability is the relative frequency resulting from repeated trials of a simulation and determine observed probabilities
Example(s):
Inferring that if a 6 appears on the uppermost face of a die 30 times when a die is rolled 120 times, the observed probability of a 6 is 30/120=1/4.UnC5
* Explore relative frequencies by using a random number generator to repeat a chance experiment a number of times
UnC5
Determine probabilities for complementary events
* Identify and describe the complement of an event
Example(s):
Explaining that the complement of rolling a 3 on a die is not rolling a 3 on a die.UnC5
* Verify that the sum of the probability of an event and its complement is a total of 1
Example(s):
Verifying that since the probability of rolling a 3 on a die is 1/6  and the probability of not rolling a 3 on a die is 5/6, then the sum of the event and its complement is 1.UnC5
* Solve problems involving the probability of complementary events
UnC5
* Represent the possible outcomes for complementary events in various forms

Outcomes and content for Stage 5
Financial mathematics A
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* solves financial problems involving simple interest, earning money and spending money MA5-FIN-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-FIN-01, MALS-FIN-02
Content
Solve problems involving earning money
* Solve problems involving wages given an hourly rate of pay including penalty rates for overtime, weekends and public holidays
Example(s):
Calculating the hourly rate of pay if a person worked a 4-hour shift and earned $45 including a $5 tip.
PrT4, PrT5
* Calculate earnings from non-wage sources exploring commission, piece work and royalties
PrT5, PrT6
* Calculate weekly, fortnightly, monthly and yearly earnings assuming 1 year = 52 weeks
MeT4, PrT5
* Calculate leave loading by finding a percentage of eligible normal pay
PrT2
* Investigate sources of published tables or online calculators and use these to calculate the weekly, fortnightly or monthly tax to be deducted from a worker's pay under the Australian Pay-As-You-Go (PAYG) taxation system
UnM8
* Determine annual taxable income by exploring allowable deductions and current tax rates
UnM8
* Calculate net earnings after deductions and taxation
UnM8
Solve problems involving simple interest
* Establish and use the formula I=Prn to find simple interest where I= simple interest, P= principal, r= interest rate per time period and n= number of time periods
UnM8, NPA8
* Apply the simple interest formula to solve problems related to investing money at simple interest rates, both algebraically and graphically
PrT6, UnM8, NPA8
Solve problems involving spending money
* Calculate the cost of buying items on terms, by paying an initial deposit and making regular repayments
UnM8
* Examine payment options involving buy now, pay later and investigate the costs associated with these schemes for purchasing goods
Example(s):
Exploring options for a student wanting to buy a laptop valued at $2700. They have the option to buy it using a company that offers a buy now, pay later option. Researching which companies offer this facility, how will the cost of the laptop be split into repayment amounts and what costs or penalties are associated with the purchase if the student cannot make their repayments on time?PrT6, UnM8
* Examine the principles behind short-term loans involving small dollar amounts and compare borrowing costs associated with using these products
PrT6

Financial mathematics B
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* solves financial problems involving compound interest and depreciation MA5-FIN-C-02
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-FIN-01, MALS-FIN-02
Content
Solve problems involving compound interest and depreciation
* Examine compound interest for up to 3 time periods using repetition of the formula for simple interest
UnM10, NPA8
* Associate the calculation of the total value of a compound interest investment with repeated multiplication, using digital tools
Example(s):
Modelling repeated multiplication with digital tools for a rate of 5% per annum, using 1.05 for each year.
* Establish and use the formula FV=PV(1+r)^n to find compound interest where FV = future value of the investment, PV= present value of the investment, r= interest rate per time period and n= number of time periods
PrT7, UnM10, NPA8
* Solve problems involving compound interest
Example(s):
Using a guess and refine strategy to determine the number of years required to have $2000 from an investment of $500 if interest is compounded quarterly at 4.8% per annum.UnM10
* Compare simple interest with compound interest in practical situations
PrT7, UnM10, NPA8
* Use the compound interest formula to establish the depreciation formula S=V_0 (1-r)^n  where S= salvage value, V_0= initial value of the asset, r= depreciation rate per time period and n= number of periods
UnM8, NPA8
* Solve problems involving the depreciation of an asset

Algebraic techniques A
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* simplifies algebraic fractions with numerical denominators and expands algebraic expressions MA5-ALG-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-PAT-01
Content
Apply the 4 operations to simplify algebraic fractions with numerical denominators
* Simplify expressions that involve algebraic fractions with numerical denominators
Example(s):
Simplifying a/2+a/3,   2x/5-x/3, 3x/4×2x/9, 3x/4÷9x/2.
Apply the distributive law to the expansion of algebraic expressions, and collect like terms where appropriate
* Expand algebraic expressions, including those with negative coefficients
Example(s):
Expanding -3(5x^2+2y+4).
* Expand and simplify algebraic expressions by removing grouping symbols and collecting like terms where appropriate
Example(s):
Expanding and simplifying 2y(y-5)+4(y-5),  4x(3x+2y+2)-(x-1),  18-4(x-2).
* Expand binomial products algebraically using the distributive law or consider areas of rectangles as a possible method of expansion
Example(s):
Expanding (x+3)(x+8) using an area model.

Image long description: A rectangle divided into 4 boxes expanding algebraic terms using the area method. x plus 8 is on the top and x plus 3 is on the left side. x squared, 8x, 3x and 24 are inside the rectangle.
Generalising the commutative property of arithmetic to binomial products, such as (a+b)(c+d)=(c+d)(a+b).

Indices A
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* simplifies algebraic expressions involving positive-integer and zero indices, and establishes the meaning of negative indices for numerical bases MA5-IND-C-01
Content
Extend and apply the index laws to variables, using positive-integer indices and the zero index
* Apply the index laws for numerical bases with positive-integer indices to develop the index laws in algebraic form
Example(s):
Generalising numerical expressions, such as 2^2×2^3=2^(2 + 3)=2^5 to a^m×a^n=a^(m + n).

Generalising numerical expressions, such as 2^5÷2^3=2^(5 - 3)=2^2  to a^m÷a^n=a^(m - n).

Generalising numerical expressions, such as (2^2 )^3=2^(2 × 3)=2^6  to (a^m )^n=a^mn.
* Establish that x^0=1 algebraically using index laws
Example(s):
By considering x^4/x^4 =x^(4 - 4)=x^0  and  x^4/x^4 =(x × x × x × x)/(x × x × x × x)=1, establish that x^0=1.
* Simplify algebraic expressions that involve the zero index
Example(s):
Recognising and explaining that 7m^0=7×1=7 and (3x)^0+5=6.
Simplify algebraic products and quotients using index laws
* Simplify algebraic expressions that involve powers, products and quotients of simple algebraic terms containing positive-integer indices
Example(s):
Simplifying  (?3x?^2 )^3=?27x?^6   and ?15a?^6÷?3a?^2=?5a?^4.
Apply index laws to numerical expressions with negative-integer indices
* Apply index notation, patterns and index laws to establish the meaning of negative indices for numerical bases
Example(s):
Using numerical patterns:

Image long description: 6 columns in a table showing descending powers with a base of 3 on the top row and their calculations on the bottom row. On the top row, 3 cubed, 3 squared, 3 to the power of 1, 3 to the power of 0, 3 to the power of minus 1 and 3 to the power of minus 2. The bottom row is 27, 9, 3, 1, one-third, and 1 over 3 squared equals 1 over 9.
Applying index laws: 4^3÷4^5=4^(-2)  and 4^3/4^5 =1/4^2  to establish that 4^(-2)=1/4^2 .
* Evaluate numerical expressions involving a negative index by first representing them with a positive index
Example(s):
Evaluating 3^(-4)=1/3^4 =1/81.
* Represent given numbers in index form (integer indices and bases only) and vice versa
Example(s):
Representing 1/125 as 1/5^3  and 5^(-3).

Equations A
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* solves linear equations of up to 3 steps, limited to one algebraic fraction MA5-EQU-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-ADS-01, MALS-MDI-01
Content
Solve linear equations involving up to 3 steps
* Solve linear equations using algebraic techniques involving up to 3 steps
* Solve linear equations with pronumerals on both sides of the equation
* Solve linear equations involving grouping symbols
* Verify solutions using substitution
NPA6
Solve linear equations involving one algebraic fraction
* Solve linear equations involving one algebraic fraction using up to 3 steps
Solve linear equations arising from word problems and substitution into formulas
* Solve linear equations arising from substitution into formulas
Example(s):
Using the formula to convert temperatures measured in Fahrenheit to Celsius, C=5/9 (F-32), find the temperature in Fahrenheit if the temperature in Celsius is 100^°.NPA6
* Represent word problems as linear equations, solve the equations and interpret the solutions in the context of the problem
NPA7

Linear relationships A
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* determines the midpoint, gradient and length of an interval, and graphs linear relationships, with and without digital tools MA5-LIN-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-POS-01
Content
Find the midpoint and gradient of a line segment (interval) on the Cartesian plane
* Plot and join 2 points to form an interval on the Cartesian plane and use the interval as the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle
Example(s):
NPA7
* Apply the relationship gradient  m=rise/run to find the gradient/slope of the interval joining the 2 points
Example(s):

Image long description: A right-angled triangle is formed from the interval on the Cartesian plane with a rise of 4 and a run of 3. Therefore, the gradient is 4 over 3.
* Distinguish between intervals with positive and negative gradients from a diagram
Example(s):

Image long description: On both Cartesian planes, lines sloping upwards are positive gradients and lines sloping downwards are negative gradients.
* Explain why horizontal intervals have a gradient of 0 and vertical intervals have undefined gradients using the gradient relationship
* Determine the midpoint of horizontal and vertical intervals on the Cartesian plane
Example(s):

Image long description: Horizontal interval at (minus 2,3) and (minus 5,3) has a midpoint at (minus 3.5,3). Vertical interval from (4,2) to (4,6) has a midpoint of (4,4).
* Apply the process for calculating the mean to find the midpoint, M of the interval joining 2 points on the Cartesian plane
Example(s):

Image long description: Intervals on a Cartesian plane from (2,2) to (5,6) has a midpoint at (3.5,4). The average of the rise is 4 over 2 and the average of the run is 3 over 2.IRD5
* Use graphing applications to find the midpoint and gradient/slope of an interval  
Find the distance between 2 points located on the Cartesian plane
* Use the interval between 2 points as the hypotenuse of a right-angled triangle on the Cartesian plane and apply Pythagoras' theorem to determine the length of the interval joining the 2 points
Example(s):

Image long description: Intervals on a Cartesian plane from (1,2) to (4,6). A right-angled triangle is formed with shorter sides 4 and 3. Pythagoras' theorem is used to calculate the longest side as 5 units in length.UGP7, UuM10
* Use graphing applications to find the distance between 2 points on the Cartesian plane
Recognise and graph equations
* Recognise that equations of the form  y=mx+c represent linear relationships or straight lines
NPA8
* Construct tables of values and use coordinates to graph a variety of linear relationships on the Cartesian plane, with and without digital tools
NPA7, NPA8
* Identify the x- and y- intercepts of lines 
* Determine whether a point lies on a line using substitution
NPA6
Examine parallel, horizontal and vertical lines
* Explain that parallel lines have equal gradients/slopes
Example(s):
Using graphing applications, graph the following equations and compare them to identify similarities and differences between the graphs: 
y=3x+1, y=3x-1, y=2x, y=2x-2, y=3x+4, y=2x-5, 
y=-2x+3, y=-2x+5, y=4-2x, y=-2x, y=1-x, y=2-3x.UGP6
* Explain why the x-axis has the equation y=0 and the y-axis has the equation x=0
* Recognise y=c  as a line parallel to the x-axis and x=k as a line parallel to the y-axis 
* Graph vertical and horizontal lines

Linear relationships B
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* graphs and interprets linear relationships using the gradient/slope-intercept form MA5-LIN-C-02
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-POS-01
Content
Examine the gradient/slope-intercept form
* Interpret the coefficient of x(m) as the gradient/slope, and the constant (c) as the y-intercept for equations of the form y=mx+c
* Find the equation of a straight line in the form y=mx+c, given the gradient/slope and the y-intercept of the line
Example(s):
Finding the equation of a straight line that has a gradient of -3 and a y-intercept of -8.
* Graph equations of the form y=mx+c by using the gradient and the y-intercept
Example(s):
Graphing the line y=3x-1 using the gradient and y-intercept.

Image long description: Equation graphed on the Cartesian plane. The line slopes upwards, passes through (0, minus 1) and has a gradient of 3 and a y-intercept of minus 1.
* Determine the gradient and y-intercept of a straight line from its graph and apply these values to determine the equation of the line
Example(s):
Finding the gradient and y-intercept of the line below and then its equation.

Image long description: Line slopes downwards, passes through (0,2) and has a gradient of minus 5 over 8.
* Explain the effect of increasing or decreasing the gradient with or without digital tools
Example(s):

Image long description: The steeper line has a gradient of 4 and the flatter line has a gradient of a half.
* Recognise and describe linear relationships in real-life contexts
Example(s):
Determining what the gradient of the line represents in the context of the graph below and describing what a steeper or flatter line would represent.

Find the equations of parallel and perpendicular lines
* Explain that 2 straight lines are perpendicular if the product of their gradients is -1
Example(s):
Using digital tools to verify that the angle between 2 lines with gradients of -3 and 1/3 is 90°.
* Find the equation of a straight line that is parallel or perpendicular to another given line by applying y=mx+c

Non-linear relationships A
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* identifies connections between algebraic and graphical representations of quadratic and exponential relationships in various contexts MA5-NLI-C-01
Content
Examine the connection between algebraic and graphical representations of quadratics and exponentials
* Represent quadratic and exponential relationships using graphing applications
Example(s):
Using graphing applications to graph the equations below, and then describing and comparing their shapes and features: 
y=x^2, y=-x^2, y=x^2+1 and y=x^2-1.
y=2^x, y=3^x  and y=4^x.
* Construct a table of values to graph non-linear relationships involving quadratics and exponentials
Example(s):
Graphing y=2^x using a table of values.

NPA8, NPA9
* Explain that quadratic relationships are represented by parabolas
* Identify graphs and equations of parabolas and exponential curves
NPA8
* Recognise quadratics and exponentials in real-life contexts
NPA8

Non-linear relationships B
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* identifies and compares features of parabolas and exponential curves in various contexts MA5-NLI-C-02
Content
Graph and examine quadratic relationships
* Graph and compare parabolas of the form y=?kx?^2 and y=?kx?^2+c using graphing applications
Example(s):
Describing the effect of k on the graph of y=?kx?^2 for different values of k (including k<0 and -1<k<1) or the effect of c on the graph ?y=x?^2+c (including c<0) using graphing applications.
* Identify and describe the key features of parabolas of the form y=?kx?^2 and y=?kx?^2+c including the vertex, x- and y-intercepts, axis of symmetry and concavity
Example(s):
Using graphing applications, graph y=2x^2, y=x^2-1, y=-x^2, y=4-x^2, finding the axis of symmetry, x- and y-intercepts and stating the coordinates of the vertex of each graph.

Identifying which of the curves y=2x^2, y=x^2-1, y=-x^2, y=4-x^2 are concave up or concave down and explaining which feature of the equation determines the concavity of the parabola.
Graph and examine exponential relationships
* Graph and compare exponential curves of the form y=a^x using graphing applications
* Describe features of exponential curves including the y-intercept, asymptote and the nature of the curve for very large and very small values of x
Example(s):
Using the equation y=2^x, find the y-value when x=0^ and explain that this is the y-intercept of an equation of the form y=a^x.

Explaining why the curve y=3^x has no x-intercepts and the line y=0 is an asymptote to the curve y=3^x.
Distinguish between linear, quadratic and exponential relationships by examining their graphical representations
* Associate graphs of straight lines, parabolas and exponential curves with the appropriate equations
Example(s):
Identifying y=2x+3 as a straight line, y=x^2-1 as a parabola, and y=2^x as an exponential curve.
* Recognise non-linear relationships in real-life contexts and solve related problems
Example(s):
Using a table of values to examine and graph the growth of a population according to the equation P=100×2^t, where t is the time in hours and determine the initial population and the average growth rate per hour.
* Use graphing applications to solve a pair of simultaneous equations where one equation is non-linear and interpret the solution

Numbers of any magnitude
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* solves measurement problems by using scientific notation to represent numbers and rounding to a given number of significant figures MA5-MAG-C-01
Content
Identify and describe very small and very large measurements
* Identify and describe the meaning of common prefixes, such as milli, centi and kilo
UuM8, NPV9
* Establish the meaning of prefixes for very small or very large measurement units
Example(s):
Using light years to measure distances in space, finding the diameter of a red blood cell, or using milliseconds, microseconds and nanoseconds as examples of very small units of time.
Find absolute and percentage error
* Determine the precision of a measuring instrument by finding the smallest division on the instrument
* Find the absolute error of measuring instruments (absolute error=1/2×precision)
Example(s):
Explaining that a length recorded as 10.2 cm would have an absolute error of 0.05 cm and the true length could lie between 10.15 cm and 10.25 cm.
* Calculate the percentage error of a given measurement by applying the formula: percentage error=absolute error/measurement×100%
PrT2
Estimate and round numbers to a specified degree of accuracy
* Apply the language of estimation appropriately, including the terms rounding, approximate and level of accuracy
NPV7, NPV8
* Round numbers to a specified number of significant figures
NPV8
* Examine the effect that truncating or rounding during calculations has on the accuracy of the results
Express numbers in scientific notation
* Recognise the need for notation to express very large or very small numbers
Example(s):
Reasoning that the mass of the sun in kilograms as a decimal would require following the 2 with 30 zeroes and explaining that this (approximate) measurement can be written simply as 2 × 1030 kg using scientific notation.

Investigating counting systems and ways of expressing very large or very small numbers from other cultures.NPV10, MuS10
* Represent numbers using scientific notation in practical contexts
NPV10, MuS10
* Order numbers expressed in scientific notation
Example(s):
Arranging, in ascending order, the masses of the planets in the solar system, expressed in scientific notation.NPV10
* Represent numbers expressed in scientific notation as a decimal
NPV9, NPV10
* Estimate the value of calculations involving scientific notation by applying knowledge of index laws
Example(s):
Considering estimates like(3.12×10^4 )×(4.2×10^6 )˜12×10^10=1.2×10^11.NPV10
* Solve problems with calculations involving scientific notation using digital tools
Example(s):
Determining how many iron atoms would fit on the top of a pinhead given the estimation for the diameter of an iron atom.NPV10

Trigonometry A
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* applies trigonometric ratios to solve right-angled triangle problems MA5-TRG-C-01
Content
Demonstrate and explain the constancy of trigonometric ratios for a given angle in right-angled triangles
* Identify and label the hypotenuse, adjacent and opposite sides with respect to a given angle in a right-angled triangle in any orientation
* Define the sine, cosine and tangent ratios for angles in right-angled triangles and use trigonometric notation  sin??,cos??,tan??
* Identify the sine, cosine and tangent ratios in a right-angled triangle
* Verify the constancy of the sine, cosine and tangent ratios for a given angle by applying knowledge of similar right-angled triangles
Example(s):
Creating a triangle and enlarging each side length by the same scale factor (eg 2) and verifying that the trigonometric ratios are constant for this enlarged triangle. Repeating with different scale factors of 3, 4 and 1.5 and verifying that the trigonometric ratios remain constant.

* Find approximations of the trigonometric ratios for a given angle
* Find the size of an angle given one of the trigonometric ratios for the angle using digital tools
Example(s):
Calculating ? given sin??=4/11.
Apply trigonometry to solve right-angled triangle problems
* Apply trigonometry to find the lengths of unknown sides in right-angled triangles with a given angle including angles in degrees and minutes
UuM10, UGP7
* Apply trigonometry to find the size of unknown angles in right-angled triangles including in degrees and minutes
UuM10, UGP7
* Solve a variety of practical problems involving trigonometric ratios in right-angled triangles

Trigonometry B
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* applies trigonometry to solve problems, including bearings and angles of elevation and depression MA5-TRG-C-02
Content
Solve right-angled triangle problems involving angles of elevation and depression
* Identify and describe angles of elevation and depression
* Solve practical problems involving angles of elevation and depression
Example(s):
Using a clinometer and measuring tape, measure the angle of elevation and the distance from a point to the base of a tree and estimate the height of the tree.

Examining the way Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples use celestial navigation - the sun, moon, stars and horizon - to navigate and identify location and distance.UGP7
Solve right-angled triangle problems involving bearings
* Identify and interpret true bearings and compass bearings
* Explain the difference between true bearings and compass bearings and convert between them
Example(s):
Demonstrating that the compass bearing N30°W is the same as the true bearing 330°T, discussing the advantages of each type of bearing.
* Solve practical problems involving bearings
Example(s):
Finding the distance between the port and Boat B if Boat A leaves a port on a bearing of 030°T and sails 15 km until it is due east of Boat B and Boat B is due north of the port.

Image long description: A compass showing Boat A on a bearing of 030 degrees and due east of Boat B. Boat A is 15 km from the centre of the compass and Boat B is x km from the centre of the compass.

Area and surface area A
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* solves problems involving the surface area of right prisms and practical problems involving the area of composite shapes and solids MA5-ARE-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-ARE-01
Content
Solve problems involving areas and surface areas
* Solve practical problems involving the areas of composite shapes
Example(s):

Image long description: A circle with a diameter of 2 metres. The vertex of a sector with an internal angle of 35 degrees and has a radius of 58 metres is attached to the centre of the circle. The part of the sector that is outside the circle is shaded.

Creating your name using composite shapes to a maximum of 50 cm2. 

Image long description: The letters A to F made up of simple rectangles and semicircles. Each shape has dimensions varying between 5 cm and 20 cm. For example, the letter C is composed of a rectangle 10 cm long and 2 semicircles with a diameter of 10 cm.UuM10, NPA8, UGP6
* Identify the edge lengths and the faces making up the surface area of prisms
Example(s):
Using digital tools to examine and construct various right prisms and their corresponding nets, and identifying the edge lengths and faces making up the surface area of the relevant prism.

* Recognise and justify whether a diagram represents a net of a right prism
* Create and rearrange nets of right prisms
* Find the surface areas of prisms, given their nets, excluding curved surfaces
Example(s):
Finding the surface area of a triangular prism.

* Solve problems involving surface areas of prisms, excluding curved surfaces
Example(s):
Finding the amount of paint needed to paint the walls and ceiling of this room if 1 litre covers 10 square metres.

Image long description: A rectangular room that is 6 metres long, 3.5 metres wide and 3 metres high. A rectangular door that is 2.5 metres high and 1 metre wide and rectangular window that is 2 metres long and 1.5 metres high.
Develop and apply the formula for surface areas of cylinders
* Recognise the curved surface of a cylinder as a rectangle and apply this knowledge to calculate the area of the curved surface
* Develop and apply the formula to find the surface area of a closed cylinder: A=2?pr?^2+2prh, where r is the length of the radius and h is the perpendicular height
Example(s):
Applying the surface area formula for a variety of yidaki (didgeridoo), identifying different tones the instrument makes based on the surface area of the yidaki.

Examining the effects on the surface area of cylinders of equal height when the radius is changed.
Solve problems involving surface areas of cylinders and related composite solids
* Solve problems involving surface areas of cylinders and related composite solids
Example(s):
Calculating the surface area in square metres of the outside of a large mailbox that requires painting.

Image long description: A composite prism with a front face of half a cylinder on top of a rectangle. The rectangular prism is 30 cm wide, 50 cm long and 40 cm high.

Calculating the surface area of an emu caller, clapsticks or a warup drum from the Torres Strait Islands.

Volume A
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* solves problems involving the volume of composite solids consisting of right prisms and cylinders MA5-VOL-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-VOL-01
Content
Solve problems involving composite solids consisting of right prisms and cylinders
* Find the volumes of composite right prisms with uniform cross-sections that may be dissected into triangles and quadrilaterals
Example(s):
Calculating the volume of earth that must be excavated so that the pool shell below fits exactly into the hole.

Image long description: A composite prism with a rectangle and trapezium as the face and a depth of 10 m. The rectangle is 2.4 m long and 5 m wide and the trapezium has parallel sides of 1.2 m and 2.4 m and a perpendicular of 25 m.UuM10, UGP6, NPA8
* Find the volumes of right prisms that have uniform cross-sections in the form of sectors, semicircles and quadrants
UuM9, UGP6, NPA8
* Calculate volumes of composite solids consisting of right prisms and cylinders
UuM10, UGP6, NPA8
* Solve practical problems related to the volumes and capacities of composite solids
UuM10

Properties of geometrical figures A
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* identifies and applies the properties of similar figures and scale drawings to solve problems MA5-GEO-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-GEO-01
Content
Identify and describe the properties of similar figures
* Describe similar figures as having the same shape but not necessarily the same size
* Verify and explain that in similar polygons, the corresponding angles are equal and the corresponding side lengths are in the same proportion
Example(s):
Using the enlargement transformation and measurement to determine that the size of matching angles and the ratio of matching sides are preserved in similar polygons.
* Name the vertices in matching order when using the similar symbol (~) in a similarity statement
* Match the corresponding sides and angles of similar polygons
Solve problems using ratio and scale factors in similar figures
* Apply an appropriate scale to enlarge or reduce a diagram
Example(s):
Using a grid to create a rectangle and reduce its dimensions by half.

Image long description: 2 rectangles demonstrating reduction. The first rectangle is 8 cm long and 6 cm wide and this leads to a rectangle that is 4 cm long and 3 cm wide.
* Determine the scale factor for pairs of similar polygons and circles
Example(s):
Calculating the scale factor from shape A to shape B for the following pairs of shapes:

Image long description: 2 triangles show a scale factor of 3. Triangle A has sides 1.5 cm, 3.4 cm and 7 cm. Triangle B has corresponding sides 4.5 cm, 10.2 cm and 21 cm. In a second example, 2 circles demonstrate a scale factor of 2 over 5. Circle A has a diameter of 15 cm whereas Circle B has a diameter of 6 cm.
* Apply knowledge of scale factor to find unknown sides in similar polygons
* Solve problems involving unknown lengths and scale factors of similar figures and related practical problems
Example(s):
Exploring scale in photographs, maps, plans and drawings found in texts and online sources.
* Solve problems involving scale drawings, with or without digital tools
Example(s):
Using digital tools to see an aerial view of a school, identifying the scale (eg 2 cm = 20 m, ? the scale is 1:1000) and using it to find out approximately how far it is from the library to a classroom.

Using digital tools to identify Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Languages maps or topographical artworks, analysing the scale and finding distances between points.

Data analysis A
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* compares and analyses datasets using summary statistics and graphical representations MA5-DAT-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-DAT-02
Content
Examine standard deviation as a measure of spread
* Identify standard deviation as a measure of spread
IRD5
* Calculate the standard deviation of a small dataset using digital tools
* Compare small datasets using standard deviation
Determine quartiles and interquartile range
* Determine the 5-number summary for sets of numerical data
Example(s):
Determining the 5-number summary (minimum and maximum values, median, and upper and lower quartiles) for the datasets below: 

Image long description: The first dataset containing the numbers 2, 2, 3, 4, 4, 11, 11, 12, 16, 20 and 22. The minimum is 2, Q1 is 3, Q2 is 11, Q3 is 16 and the maximum is 22. The second dataset contains the numbers 2, 3, 4, 4, 11, 12, 12, 16 and 20. 22. The minimum is 2, Q1 is 4, Q2 is 11.5, Q3 is 16 and the maximum is 22. The third dataset contains the numbers 2, 2, 3, 4, 4, 9, 11, 12, 12, 16, 20, 22. The minimum is 2, Q1 is 3.5, Q2 is 10, Q3 is 14 and the maximum is 22.IRD5
* Determine the 5-number summary from graphical representations
Example(s):
Determining the 5-number summary from a dot plot:

Image long description: A dot plot with 15 scores plotted. Indicated scores include a minimum of 0, Q1 as 1, Q2 as 3, Q3 as 4 and a maximum of 6.IRD5
* Determine the interquartile range (IQR) for datasets
IRD5
* Compare and explain the relative merits of range and IQR as measures of spread
IRD5
Represent datasets using box plots and use them to compare datasets
* Represent numerical datasets using a box plot to display the median, upper and lower quartiles, and maximum and minimum values
IRD5
* Compare 2 or more numerical datasets using parallel box plots drawn on the same scale
Example(s):
Comparing the range, median and IQR for Class A and Class B using the following parallel box plot: 

Image long description: Class A has a minimum of 2, Q1 of 3, median of 3, Q3 of 6 and maximum of 9. Class B has a minimum of 0, Q1 of 5, median of 6, Q3 of 7 and maximum of 8.IRD5
* Compare and contrast the centres, spreads and shapes of 2 or more numerical datasets, using box plots and numerical statistics, including the 5-number summary
* Determine quartiles from datasets displayed in histograms and dot plots, and represent these as a box plot
IRD6
* Identify and describe skewness or symmetry of datasets displayed in histograms, dot plots and box plots
Example(s):
Analysing a negatively skewed distribution where the mean is smaller than the median and comparing it with a positively skewed distribution where the mean is larger than the median. 

Image long description: Negatively skewed data has the curve highest to the right with the box to the right, and positively skewed data has the curve highest to the left with the box to the left.IRD6
* Interpret box plots to draw conclusions and make inferences about the dataset
IRD6

Data analysis B
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* displays and interprets datasets involving bivariate data MA5-DAT-C-02
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-DAT-02
Content
Identify and describe numerical datasets involving 2 variables
* Distinguish between situations involving 1-variable and 2-variable (bivariate) data and explain when each is needed
Example(s):
Studying a group of students to find out the amount of time spent studying and their mathematics scores involves 2 variables (time studying and mathematics scores). Studying a group of students to find out their time taken to complete a 100 m race involves only 1 variable.
* Explain the difference between variables that have an association and variables that have a causal relationship
Example(s):
Describing the causal relationship between an increase in temperature during the day and the number of ice creams sold.

Describing the association between a person's height and their arm span.
* Identify and describe the independent variable and dependent variable in relationships with possible cause and effect
Example(s):
Examining the question 'How does watching television before bedtime affect your sleep?', the independent variable would be the amount of time spent watching television before bedtime and the dependent variable would be the number of hours of sleep or the number of hours of quality sleep.
Represent datasets involving 2 numerical variables, using a scatter plot and a line of best fit, by eye
* Gather data on a topic of interest involving 2 numerical variables
* Represent the data using a scatter plot
* Create a line of best fit, by eye, on an existing scatter plot
Example(s):

Interpret data involving 2 numerical variables, using graphical representations
* Describe informally the association between 2 numerical variables and apply terminology about form (linear), strength (strong, moderate or weak) and direction (positive or negative)
* Use the line of best fit, by eye, to make predictions between known data values (interpolation) and what might happen beyond known data values (extrapolation)
Example(s):
Using the line of best fit below, how old is a typical male when he reaches a height of 170 cm? Using the line of best fit below and extending the line to the vertical axis, what height would a typical 10-year-old male be?

* Explain the limitations of the model when making predictions
Example(s):
Reasoning why a scatter plot may not be useful for predicting the height of a typical 45-year-old male.

Probability A
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* solves problems involving probabilities in multistage chance experiments and simulations MA5-PRO-C-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-PRO-01
Content
Describe multistage chance experiments involving independent and dependent events
* Explain the difference between dependent and independent events in experiments involving 2 stages
UnC5
* Explain how the probability of independent and dependent events differs in relation to replacement
Example(s):
Calculating the probability that a green marble is chosen on the second draw if a bag contains 2 red marbles and 5 green marbles and a person draws 1 marble at a time out of the bag without replacing it. Examining the difference when the marble is replaced before drawing the second marble.UnC5
Solve problems for multistage chance experiments
* Record all possible outcomes for multistage chance experiments
Example(s):
Representing all possible heads (H) and tails (T) outcomes for tossing 2 coins using a tree diagram and an array.

Image long description: The tree diagram originates with H and T as the options for the first coin, and H and T stemming from each of those options for the second coin. The table has H and T on the top row and H and T on the first column. The outcomes are HH, HT, TH and TT.UnC5
* Determine the probabilities of outcomes for multistage independent events using P(A and B)=P(A)×P(B), where necessary
Example(s):
Determining the probability of tossing a head and a tail in any order when 2 unbiased coins are tossed.

Image long description: The tree diagram originates with H and T as the options for the first coin, and H and T stemming from each of those options for the second coin. HT and TH are highlighted, leading to the probability of H and T equal to a half.
* Determine the probabilities of outcomes for multistage dependent events
Example(s):
Representing an experiment where 2 discs are selected without replacement from a bag of identical discs containing 8 red discs and 8 blue discs and calculating the probability of selecting one red disc and one blue disc.

Image long description: The tree diagram originates with R and B as the options for the first disc, and R and B stemming from each of those options for the second disc. The probability of R for the first disc is 1 over 2 and the probability of B for the first disc is 1 over 2. The probability of R for the second if R is chosen first is 7 over 15, and the probability of B for the second if R is chosen first is 8 over 15. The probability of R for the second if B is chosen first is 8 over 15, and the probability of B for the second if B is chosen first is 7 over 15. RB and BR are highlighted. The probability of R and B is 1 over 2 multiplied by 8 over 15 plus 1 over 2 multiplied by 8 over 15 which equals 16 over 30.
* Associate complementary events with probabilities in multistage chance experiments
UnC6
Design and use simulations to model and examine situations involving probability
* Design and conduct a probability simulation, modelling probabilities of events, using digital tools
* Record and use the results of a probability simulation to predict future events
UnC5
* Apply reasoning to evaluate the simulation and its related outcomes

Variation and rates of change A (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* identifies and solves problems involving direct and inverse variation and their graphical representations (Path: Stn, Adv) MA5-RAT-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Identify and describe problems involving direct and inverse variation
* Describe typical examples of direct variation/proportion
Example(s):
Describing the circumference of a circle as directly proportional to its radius, with a constant of variation 2p.PrT6
* Apply the language of direct variation to everyday contexts: y is directly proportional to x, y is proportional to x, y varies directly as x
PrT6
* Identify and represent direct variation/proportion as y?x (y is proportional to x) or y=kx, where k is the constant of variation 
Example(s):
Examining distance being in direct proportion to time, ? d?t. Travelling at a constant speed of 60 km/h results in the relationship d=60 t where 60 is the constant of variation.PrT7
* Describe typical examples of inverse (indirect) variation
Example(s):
Analysing situations where, as speed increases, the time taken to travel a distance decreases, or where more people are picking up rubbish in a stadium, the less time it will take to clean the stadium.PrT6
* Apply the language of inverse variation to everyday contexts:  y is inversely proportional to x,  y is proportional to the reciprocal of x,  y varies inversely as x
PrT6, NPA8
* Identify and represent inverse variation/proportion as y?1/x (y is inversely proportional to x) or y=k/x, where k is the constant of variation
Example(s):
Establishing that W=1568/D or WD=1568  if the number of workers on a worksite (W) is inversely proportional to the number of days it takes to complete the job (D) and it takes 56 workers 28 days to complete the job.

Note that this can also be written in the form xy=k; that is, the product of each x value and the corresponding y value is constant.PrT7, NPA8
Identify and describe graphs involving direct and inverse variation
* Recognise and describe direct variation from graphs, noting that the graph of y=kx is a straight line passing through the origin, with its gradient k being the constant of variation
Example(s):
Describe the graphical relationship between H and P where the number of hours a casual employee works (H) is directly proportional to the amount of pay (P) that employee receives, where the employee receives $45 for 3 hours of work.
NPA8, NPA9
* Recognise and describe inverse variation from graphs, noting that the graph of y=k/x is a curve
Example(s):
Describe the graphical relationship between H and P where the number of hours to paint a wall (H) is inversely proportional to the number of painters (P), where it takes 2 painters 4 hours to paint a wall.

Image long description: The graph of H equals 8 over P is drawn with H on the vertical axis and P on the horizontal axis. The downward sloping curve is drawn through the points (1,8) (2,4) (4,2) and (8,1).NPA8, NPA9
Solve problems involving direct and inverse variation and examine the relationship between graphs and equations corresponding to proportionality
* Solve problems involving direct or inverse variation using an equation
Example(s):
Finding the value of the constant of variation if a varies directly as b and a=2 when b=7.PrT7, NPA8
* Use linear conversion graphs to convert from one unit to another
Example(s):
Using the graph to convert 50 US dollars to Australian dollars and interpreting the slope of the line as the exchange rate in this context.
NPA9
* Graph equations representing direct variation, with or without digital tools
NPA8

Variation and rates of change B (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* analyses and constructs graphs relating to rates of change (Path: Stn, Adv) MA5-RAT-P-02
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Analyse graphs that are decreasing or increasing at a constant rate
* Describe direct variation graphs as increasing at a constant rate and interpret the gradient of the line as the rate of change
* Interpret and analyse further graphs that exhibit a constant rate of change, including those that are decreasing at a constant rate
Analyse the relationship between graphs and variable rates of change
* Interpret distance-time graphs when the speed is variable, describing the rate of increase or decrease, the initial and final points, constant relationships represented by straight lines and variable relationships represented by curved lines
Example(s):
Interpreting distance-time graphs with curved segments, representing speeding up or slowing down.

* Describe the rate of change between variables in a variety of contexts including direct and inverse variation
* Describe qualitatively the rate of change of a graph, using terms such as increasing at a decreasing rate
Example(s):
Examining situations where a quantity is decreasing at an increasing rate, decreasing at a decreasing rate, increasing at a decreasing rate, increasing at an increasing rate.

Image long description: 2 downward sloping curves showing decreasing at an increasing rate and decreasing at a decreasing rate and 2 upward sloping curves showing increasing at a decreasing rate and increasing at an increasing rate.
Construct graphical representations of rates of change
* Represent a given description of a variable rate of change of one quantity over time
Example(s):
Representing the situation where a car moves at a steady speed, accelerates to pass another car and then brakes, decelerates and stops at a set of traffic lights before accelerating again.

Image long description: A graph with distance on the y (vertical axis) and time on the x (horizontal) axis. Line on the graph shows the stop, start movements of the car.

Algebraic techniques B (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* simplifies algebraic fractions involving indices, and expands and factorises algebraic expressions (Path: Adv) MA5-ALG-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Apply the 4 operations involving algebraic fractions with pronumerals in the denominator
* Simplify algebraic fractions, including those involving indices
Example(s):
Simplifying (10a^4)/(5a^2 ), (9a^2 b)/3ab, 3ab/(9a^2 b).
* Simplify expressions that involve operations with algebraic fractions, including algebraic fractions that involve pronumerals in the denominator and/or indices
Example(s):
Simplifying these algebraic expressions with single term denominators : 2ab/3×6/2b, (3x^2)/?8y?^5 ÷(15x^3)/4y, (a^2 b^4)/6×9/(a^2 b^2 ), 3/x-1/2x.
Factorise algebraic expressions by taking out a common algebraic factor
* Factorise algebraic expressions, including those involving indices, by determining the highest common factors (HCF) including negative coefficients/pronumerals
Expand binomial products and factorise monic quadratic expressions
* Expand binomial products
Example(s):
Expanding (3x-2)(2x+4) or (x+y)(2x-3y).
* Factorise monic quadratic trinomial expressions
Example(s):
Factorising x^2+7x+12, x^2-7x+12, x^2-x-12 and x^2+x-12.
* Solve problems involving expansion and factorisation of algebraic expressions

Algebraic techniques C (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* selects and applies appropriate algebraic techniques to operate with algebraic fractions, and expands, factorises and simplifies algebraic expressions (Path: Adv) MA5-ALG-P-02
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Operate with algebraic fractions involving binomial numerators and numerical denominators
* Add and subtract algebraic fractions with binomial numerators and numerical denominators
Example(s):
Simplifying (2x + 5)/6+(x - 4)/3 and   x/3-(x + 1)/5.
Expand, factorise and simplify algebraic expressions including special products
* Prove and apply these special products (a-b)(a+b)=a^2-b^2, (a+b)^2=a^2+2ab+b^2, (a-b)^2=a^2-2ab+b^2
Example(s):
Expanding (3a+1)(3a-1), (x-2y)(x+2y), (3x+7)^2 and  (5-6x)^2  by recognising the special products, in this instance the difference of 2 squares and perfect squares.
* Expand and simplify a variety of algebraic expressions including binomial products and the special products
Example(s):
Expanding and simplifying (3x+1)(2-x)+2x+4, (x+y)^2-(x-y)^2 and 18-4(x-2)^2.
* Factorise algebraic expressions involving the special products and strategies, including common factors, grouping in pairs for 4-term expressions and quadratic trinomials (monic and non-monic)
Example(s):
Factorising ?3d?^3-3d , ?2a?^2-6ab-3a+9 and 2a^2-7a-15 and verifying the result by expansion.
* Simplify algebraic expressions involving algebraic fractions using factorisation
Example(s):
Simplifying (x^2  + 3x + 2)/(x + 2) , 4/(x^2  + x)-3/(x^2  - 1) , (3m - 6)/4×8m/(m^2  - 2m) and 4/(x^2  - 9)+2/(3x + 9).

Indices B (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* applies the index laws to operate with algebraic expressions involving negative-integer indices (Path: Adv) MA5-IND-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Apply index laws to algebraic expressions involving negative-integer indices
* Apply index notation, patterns and index laws to establish a^(-1)=1/a, a^(-2)=1/a^2 , a^(-3)=1/a^3  and a^(-n)=1/a^n  
Example(s):
Explaining the difference between x^(-2), -x^2 and -2x by first examining the differences numerically using a calculator.
* Represent expressions involving negative-integer indices as expressions involving positive-integer indices and vice versa
Example(s):
Examining expressions such as x^(-3)=1/x^3  , ?2x?^(-1)=2/x^1 =2/x ,  4/x=4/x^1 =?4x?^(-1) and  1/x^2 =x^(-2).
* Apply the index laws to simplify algebraic products and quotients involving negative-integer indices
Example(s):
Justifying why the following statements of equality are true or false:
(9x^5)/?3x?^(-5) =?3x?^10  
9x^(-7)÷3x^5=3x^2
a^(-5)×a^3=a^8
a^5×a^(-7)=a^(-2)

* Describe and use x^(-1) as the reciprocal of x and generalise this relationship to expressions of the form (a/b)^(-1)
* Use knowledge of the reciprocal to simplify expressions of the form (a/b)^(-n)
Example(s):
Simplifying ((2x^2)/3)^(-2) and expressing without a negative index.

Indices C (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* describes and performs operations with surds and fractional indices (Path: Adv) MA5-IND-P-02
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Describe surds
* Describe a real number as a number that can be represented by a point on the number line
* Examine the differences between rational and irrational numbers and recognise that all rational and irrational numbers are real
* Convert between recurring decimals and their fractional form using digital tools
* Describe the term surd as referring to irrational expressions of the form v(n&x) where x is a rational number and n is an integer such that n=2, and x>0 when n is even
* Recognise that a surd is an exact value that can be approximated by a rounded decimal
* Demonstrate that vx is undefined for x<0 and that vx=0 when x=0 using digital tools
Example(s):
Explaining why an error occurs when attempting to find a value of v(-4) as opposed to v4.
* Describe vx as the positive square root of x for x>0 and v0=0
Example(s):
Reasoning why the negative solution of the relevant quadratic equation is not feasible when solving problems involving Pythagoras' theorem.
Apply knowledge of surds to solve problems
* Establish and apply the following results for x>0 and y>0: (vx)^2=x=v(x^2 ), vxy=vx×vy and v(x/y)=vx/vy
* Apply the 4 operations to simplify expressions involving surds
Example(s):
Demonstrating why v6+v8 and v14 are different.
* Expand and simplify expressions involving surds
Example(s):
Expanding and simplifying: (v15+2v3)(5v8-v10)
=5v120-v150+10v24-2v30
=5v(4×30)-v(25×6)+10v(4×6)-2v30
=10v30-5v6+20v6-2v30
=8v30+15v6
* Rationalise the denominators of surds of the form (avb)/(cvd)
Example(s):
Rationalising the denominator of (2v3)/(3v5) by multiplying the numerator and denominator by v5.
Describe and use fractional indices
* Apply index laws to describe fractional indices as: a^(1/n)=v(n&a)   and? a?^(m/n)=v(n&a^m )=(v(n&a))^m
Example(s):
Explaining why finding the square root of an expression is the same as raising the expression to the power of a half by considering that if (v9)^2=9 and (9^(1/2) )^2=9, then v9=9^(1/2).
* Translate expressions in surd form to expressions in index form and vice versa
* Evaluate numerical expressions involving fractional indices including using digital tools

Equations B (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* solves monic quadratic equations, linear inequalities and cubic equations of the form ?ax?^3=k (Path: Adv) MA5-EQU-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Solve monic quadratic equations
* Solve quadratic equations of the form ax^2+bx+c=0, limited to a=1, using factors
Solve cubic equations
* Determine that for any value of k there is a unique value of x that solves a cubic equation of the form ax^3=k where a?0
* Solve cubic equations of the form ax^3=k, leaving answers in exact form and as decimal approximations
Solve linear inequalities and graph their solutions on a number line
* Represent inequalities on a number line
Example(s):
Representing inequalities such as x<2, x=-1,  or -1<x=3 on the number line.NPV9
* Solve linear inequalities, including those with negative numbers, and graph the solutions
Example(s):
Demonstrating that solving 1-4y=5 leads to -4y=4, ?y=-1.NPV9
* Recognise that an inequality has an infinite number of solutions unless other restrictions are introduced
Example(s):
Solving 3-x/5<8 if x is a negative integer.

Equations C (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* solves linear equations of more than 3 steps, monic and non-monic quadratic equations, and linear simultaneous equations (Path: Adv) MA5-EQU-P-02
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Solve linear equations involving algebraic fractions and equations of more than 3 steps
* Solve linear equations involving more than 3 steps
* Solve equations that involve 2 or more fractions
Example(s):
Solving (2x - 5)/3-(x + 7)/5=2.
Rearrange literal equations
* Change the subject of a formula
Example(s):
Changing the subject of the formula b=(t - u)/a to u.
Solve quadratic equations using a variety of methods
* Solve equations of the form ?ax?^2+bx+c=0 by factorisation and by completing the square
Example(s):
Solving x^2+10x-16=0 by completing the square:
?x^2+10x=16
x^2+10x+25=16+25
(x+5)^2=41
x+5=±v41
x=-5±v41
* Apply the quadratic formula x=(-b±v(b^2  - 4ac))/2a to solve quadratic equations
* Apply the most appropriate method to solve a variety of quadratic equations
* Use substitution to verify solutions to quadratic equations
Example(s):
Solving x^2+2x-8=0 and verifying solutions:
(x+4)(x-2)=0
x+4=0 and x-2=0
x=-4 and x=2
verifying x=-4:
LHS =(-4)^2+2(-4)-8
=16-8-8
=0
= RHS
verifying x=2:
LHS =(2)^2+2(2)-8
=4+4-8 
=0
= RHS
* Identify whether a given quadratic equation has real solutions, and if there are real solutions, whether or not they are equal
Example(s):
Evaluating the expression b^2-4ac (from the quadratic formula) and describing the significance of this value for the equation ?2x?^2-5x-20=0 and the relationship between this value and the number of distinct solutions to the quadratic equation. Verifying this result graphically using digital tools.
* Solve quadratic equations resulting from substitution into formulas in various contexts
* Model and solve word problems using quadratic equations in various contexts
Example(s):
Evaluating the length of the shorter side of a rectangle if the rectangle has one side 3 cm longer than the other and an area of 28 ?"cm" ?^2.
* Solve equations that are reducible to quadratics
Example(s):
Solving x^4-13x^2+36=0 by substituting u for x^2.
Solve linear simultaneous equations, both algebraically and graphically
* Solve linear simultaneous equations by finding the point of intersection of their graphs
Example(s):
Graphing the linear equations y=x+2 and y=-2x-1, and solving the simultaneous equations by finding their point of intersection.

Image long description: A Cartesian plane with y on the vertical axis and x on the horizontal axis. The line y equals x plus 2 slopes upwards. The line y equals minus  2x minus 1 slopes downwards. They intersect at the point (minus 1,1).
* Solve linear simultaneous equations using algebraic techniques including substitution and elimination methods
* Model and solve word problems using simultaneous equations and interpret their solutions
* Describe an identity as an equation that is true for all values of the pronumeral and relate the identity to coincident lines
Example(s):
Examining and describing 2x+3=3+2x as an identity as it holds true for all values of x and verifying that the graphs of y=2x+3 and y=3+2x are the same (coincident lines).
* Describe a contradiction as an equation that has no solutions and relate the contradiction to parallel lines
Example(s):
Examining and describing 2x-3=2x+3 as a contradiction as it has no solution and verifying that the graphs of y=2x-3 and y=2x+3 are parallel and never intersect, resulting in no solution.

Linear relationships C (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* describes and applies transformations, the midpoint, gradient/slope and distance formulas, and equations of lines to solve problems (Path: Adv) MA5-LIN-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Apply formulas to find the midpoint and gradient/slope of an interval on the Cartesian plane
* Apply the formula to find the midpoint of the interval joining 2 points on the Cartesian plane:
M(x,y)=((x_1+x_2)/2,(y_1+y_2)/2)
* Use the relationship m=rise/run to establish the formula for the gradient/slope (m) of the interval joining the 2 points (x_1, y_1 ) and (x_2,y_2 ) on the Cartesian plane: m=(y_2  - y_1)/(x_2  -? x?_1 )
Example(s):
Explaining why the formula m=(y_1 - y_2)/(x_1  - x_2 ) gives the same value for the gradient as m=(y_2 - y_1)/(x_2  - x_1 ).
* Apply the gradient formula to find the gradient of the interval joining 2 points on the Cartesian plane
Apply the distance formula to find the distance between 2 points located on the Cartesian plane
* Apply knowledge of Pythagoras' theorem to establish the formula for the distance (d) between the 2 points (x_1, y_1 ) and (x_2,y_2 ) on the Cartesian plane: d=v((x_2-x_1 )^2+(y_2-y_1 )^2 )
Example(s):

Image long description: A Cartesian plane with y on the vertical axis and x on the horizontal axis. An interval of length c is drawn from (1,1) and (3,3). A right-angled triangle is formed with b as the vertical side and a as the horizontal side.
c^2=a^2+b^2
d^2=(x_2-x_1 )^2+(y_2-y_1 )^2
d=v((x_2-x_1 )^2+(y_2-y_1 )^2 )
* Apply the distance formula to find the distance between 2 points on the Cartesian plane
Example(s):
Justifying why the formula d=v((x_2-x_1 )^2+(y_2-y_1 )^2 ) gives the same result as using d=v((x_1-x_2 )^2+(y_1-y_2 )^2 ).
Use various forms of the equation of a straight line
* Rearrange linear equations from gradient-intercept form (y=mx+c) to general form (ax+by+c=0) and vice versa
Example(s):
Demonstrating that y=-3/4 x+2 in general form is 3x+4y-8=0.
* Find the x- and y-intercepts of a straight line in any form
* Graph the equation of a straight line in any form
* Use the point-gradient form (y-y_1=m(x-x_1 )) or the gradient-intercept form (y=mx+c) to find the equation of a line passing through a point (x_1, y_1 ), with a given gradient m
* Use the gradient and the point-gradient form to find the equation of a line passing through 2 points
* Find the equation of a line that is parallel or perpendicular to a given line in any form
Example(s):
Finding the equation of a line that is perpendicular to 3x+2y=6 and passes through (-1,2).
* Determine and justify whether 2 given lines are parallel or perpendicular
Example(s):
Determining whether the lines y=-3x+1 and x-3y-1=0 are parallel or perpendicular and justifying the result.
Solve problems by applying coordinate geometry formulas
* Solve problems including those involving geometrical figures by applying coordinate geometry formulas
Example(s):
Proving that the points (1, -1), (-1, 1) and (-v3, -v3) form an equilateral triangle.
Identify line and rotational symmetries
* Identify lines (axes) and rotational symmetry in plane shapes
* Identify line and rotational symmetry in various linear and non-linear graphs
Describe translations, reflections in an axis, and rotations through multiples of 90 degrees on the Cartesian plane, using coordinates
* Apply the notation P' to name the image resulting from applying a transformation to a point P on the Cartesian plane
* Determine and plot the coordinates for P' resulting from translating P one or more times
Example(s):
Translating point P(2,1) to the left 4 units and down 3 units and finding the coordinates of P'.
* Determine and plot the coordinates for P' resulting from reflecting P in either the x- or y-axis
Example(s):
Recognising that if P(3,2) is reflected in the ??-axis, P' has the same ??-coordinate, and its ??-coordinate has the same magnitude but opposite sign, then the coordinate P' is (3, -2).
* Determine and plot the coordinates for P' resulting from rotating P by a multiple of 90^° about the origin 

Non-linear relationships C (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* interprets and compares non-linear relationships and their transformations, both algebraically and graphically (Path: Adv) MA5-NLI-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Graph parabolas and describe their features and transformations
* Use graphing applications to compare parabolas of the form y=?kx?^2, y=?kx?^2+c, y=k(x-b)^2 and y=k(x-b)^2+c, and describe their features and transformations
* Find x- and y-intercepts algebraically, where appropriate, for the graph of y=?ax?^2+bx+c, given a,b and c
* Determine the equation of the axis of symmetry of a parabola using either the formula x=-b/2a  or the midpoint of the x-intercepts
* Find the coordinates of a parabola's vertex using a variety of methods
Example(s):
Finding the vertex for the graph y=x^2+2x-3. Completing the square to find the vertex: 
y=k(x-b)^2+c where the vertex is located at (b, c).
?y=(x^2+2x+1)-3-1
y=(x+1)^2-4
? equating  y=k(x-b)^2+c with  y=(x+1)^2-4, the vertex is located at (-1, -4).
* Graph quadratic relationships of the form y=?ax?^2+bx+c by identifying and applying features of parabolas and their equations without graphing software
Graph exponentials and describe their features and transformations
* Use graphing applications to graph exponential relationships of the form y= k(a)^x+c and y=k(a)^(-x)+c for integer values of k, a and c (where a>0 and a?1), and compare and describe any relevant features
Example(s):
Graphing y=3(2^x)-1 and y=3(2^(-x))-1, determining the equation of the asymptotes, the coordinates of the  y-intercepts and describe similarities and differences.NPA9
Graph hyperbolas and describe their features and transformations
* Use graphing applications to graph, compare and describe hyperbolic relationships of the form y=k/x for integer values of k
Example(s):
Explaining what happens to the y-values of the points on the hyperbola y=k/x as the x-values become very large or closer to zero.
* Use graphing applications to graph and describe a variety of hyperbolas, including where the equation is given in the form y=k/x+c or y=k/(x - b) for integer values of k, b and c
Example(s):
Identifying features of hyperbolas from their equations to help sketch their graphs, including identifying asymptotes, orientation, and x- and/or y-intercepts where they exist.
Graph circles and describe their features and transformations
* Derive the equation of a circle x^2+y^2=r^2 with centre (0, 0) and radius r using the distance formula
* Identify and describe equations that represent circles with centre at the origin and radius of the circle r
Example(s):
Identifying x^2+y^2=5 as a circle with centre (0,0) and radius v5 units.
* Graph circles of the form x^2+y^2=r^2, where r is the radius of the circle using graphing applications
* Establish the equation of the circle with centre (a,b) and radius r, and graph equations of the form (x-a)^2+(y-b)^2=r^2
Example(s):
Establishing the equation of a circle with centre (a, b) and radius r using the distance formula: r^2=(x-a)^2+(y-b)^2. 

Image long description: The radius is drawn from centre a, b to the edge of the circle at the point x, y. A right-angled triangle is formed with sides y minus b and x minus a.
* Find the centre and radius of a circle with the equation in the form x^2+y^2+ax+by+c=0 by completing the square
Distinguish between different types of graphs by examining their algebraic and graphical representations and solve problems
* Identify and describe features of different types of graphs based on their equations
* Identify a possible equation from a graph and verify using graphing applications
Example(s):
Comparing and contrasting the different types of graphs shown below and determining possible equations from the key features in each graph.

Image long description: An upward sloping exponential graph that cuts the y-axis at 1, a downward sloping straight-line graph, a parabola with vertex at 0, 2 that cuts the y-axis at 4, a circle with radius of 2 and centre (2, 2), and a horizontal graph cutting the y-axis at 2.
* Find points where a line intersects with a parabola, hyperbola or circle, both graphically and algebraically
Example(s):
Comparing methods of finding points of intersection of curves and justifying the choice of method for a particular pair of curves.
Graph and compare polynomial curves and describe their features and transformations
* Use graphing applications to graph and compare features of cubic equations of the form y=ax^3+c, where a and c are integers
* Use graphing applications to graph a variety of equations of the form y=?kx?^n, where n is an integer and n=2, and describe the effect on the shape of the curve where n is an odd or an even number
Example(s):
Using graphing applications, graph y=x^2, y=x^3, y=x^4, y=x^5 and y=x^6, comparing the shape of each of these curves and analysing the connection between the value of n in y=x^n and the effect on the shape of the curve.
* Use graphing applications to graph curves of the form y=?kx?^n+c and y=k(x-b)^n where n is an integer and n=2, and describe the transformations from y=?kx?^n

Polynomials (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* defines, operates with and graphs polynomials and applies the factor and remainder theorems to solve problems (Path: Adv, Ext) MA5-POL-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Define and operate with polynomials
* Recognise a polynomial expression a_n x^n+a_(n - 1) x^(n - 1)+...+a_2 x^2+a_1 x+a_0 where n=0, 1, 2... and a_0, a_1, a_2,...,a_n are real numbers
* Describe polynomials using terms such as degree, leading term, coefficient and leading coefficient, constant term, monic and non-monic
Example(s):
Recognising that the polynomial x-3x^2+4x^3-7 has the leading term 4x^3, leading coefficient of 4, constant term -7 and degree 3.
* Define a monic polynomial as having a leading coefficient of one
* Apply the notation P(x) for polynomials and P(c) to indicate the value of P(x) for x=c
Example(s):
Using P(x)=3x^3+2x^2+1 to evaluate P(3) and P(-2).
* Add, subtract and multiply polynomials
Example(s):
Evaluating P(x)+Q(x) and P(x)-Q(x) and P(x)×Q(x), if P(x)=3x^3+2x^2+1 and Q(x)=2x^2-3x-4.
Divide polynomials
* Identify the dividend, divisor, quotient and remainder in numerical division
* Divide a polynomial by a linear polynomial to find the quotient and remainder
* Express a polynomial in the form P(x)=D(x)Q(x)+R(x), where D(x) is the divisor, Q(x) is the quotient and R(x) is the remainder
Apply the factor and remainder theorems to solve problems
* Verify the remainder theorem and use it to find factors of polynomials and solve related problems
Example(s):
Finding the values of a and b given the cubic polynomial x^3+2x^2+ax+b has a remainder 15 when divided by x-3 and remainder -3 when divided by x+1.
* Develop and apply the factor theorem to factorise particular polynomials completely and solve related problems
Example(s):
Finding the values of a and b if the polynomial P(x)=3x^6-5x^3+ax^2+bx+10 is divisible by x+1 and x-2.
* Apply the factor theorem and division to find the zeroes of a polynomial P(x) and solve P(x)=0 (degree =4) 
Example(s):
Justifying that g(x)=(x+1)(x^2-x+3) only has one zero.
* State the maximum number of zeroes a polynomial of degree n can have
Graph polynomials
* Graph polynomials in factored form
Example(s):
Graphing y=P(x) by finding the zeroes of P(x)=x(x-4)(x+2).
* Graph quadratic, cubic and quartic polynomials by factorising and finding the zeroes
* Relate the term zeroes to polynomial functions and roots to polynomial equations
* Use graphing applications to determine the effect of single, double and triple roots of a polynomial equation P(x)=0 on the shape of the graph for y=P(x)
* Graph polynomials using the sign of the leading term and the multiplicity of roots for the equation P(x)=0
Example(s):
Graphing P(x)=-(x-1) (x+2)^2.
* Use graphing applications to compare the graphs of y=-P(x), y=P(-x), y=P(x)+c and y=kP(x) to the graph of y=P(x)
Example(s):
Using graphing applications to examine the differences between the graphs for  y=P(x), y=-P(x) and y=P(-x) for P(x)=x(x-1)(x+1).

Logarithms (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* establishes and applies the laws of logarithms to solve problems (Path: Adv) MA5-LOG-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Examine logarithms both numerically and graphically
* Define the term logarithm: the logarithm of a number to any positive base a is the index to which a is raised to give this number
* Recognise equivalence where y=a^x is equivalent to x=log_a?y where a>0 and a?1
* Translate statements expressing a number in index form into equivalent statements expressing the logarithm of the number
Example(s):
Translating the following from index form into equivalent logarithmic form: 9=3^2, ?log_3?9=2 and  4^(3/2)=8, ?log_4?8=3/2.
* Use graphing applications to compare and contrast graphs for the functions y=a^x and y=log_a?x
Example(s):
Graphing y=2^x and y=log_2?x on the same axes and discussing the importance of a common scale for the x and y-axes to show they are symmetrical in y=x.
* Generalise that y=log_a?x is an increasing function when a>1 and decreasing when 0<a<1
Establish and apply the laws of logarithms to solve problems
* Deduce laws of logarithms from laws of indices
Example(s):
Laws of logarithms
log_a?m+log_a?n=log_a??(mn)?
log_a?m-log_a?n=log_a?(m/n)
log_a?(m^n )=n log_a?m

Examining the restrictions on x for log?(x^2 )=2 log?(x).
* Establish and use a variety of logarithmic results
Example(s):
Logarithmic results
log_a?a=1
log_a?1=0
log_a??1/x?=-log_a?x
log_a?b=log_c?b/log_c?a 
* Apply the laws of logarithms to evaluate and simplify expressions
Example(s):
Evaluating log_a?18 given log_a?2=0.431 and log_a?3=0.683
* Solve simple equations that involve exponents or logarithms
Example(s):
Solving 2^t=8, 4^(t + 1)=1/(8v2), log_27?3=x and log_4?x=-2.
* Examine logarithmic scales and explain their use in various contexts
Example(s):
Describing the Richter scale, measuring sound levels in decibels and f-stops for ratios of photographic exposure as logarithmic scales.

Functions and other graphs (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* uses function notation to describe and graph functions of one variable and graphs inequalities in one and 2 variables (Path: Adv) MA5-FNC-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Define relations and functions, and use function notation
* Define a relation over 2 sets as an association between the elements of one set to the elements of another set
Example(s):
Describing a relation as an association between the elements of one set to the elements of another set.

Image long description: Minus 3, 3 and 0 are in the first set, and minus 4, 4, minus 5 and 5 are in the second set. Minus 3 is connected to minus 4 and 4. 3 is connected to minus 4 and 4. 0 is connected to minus 5 and 5.
* Notate relations as a set of ordered pairs (x,y) of real numbers
* Define a function as a relation over 2 sets where each element of the first set is associated with exactly one element in the second set
Example(s):
Describing a function as a relation with the property that for each input value there is only one output value.

Image long description: Minus 2, 2, minus 1, 1 and 0 are in the first set, and 1 over 4, 4, 1 over 2, 2 and 1 are in the second set. Minus 2 is connected to 1 over 4. 2 is connected to 4. Minus 1 is connected to 1 over 2, 1 is connected to 2, and 0 is connected to 1.
* Apply the vertical line test on a graph to decide whether it represents a function
* Use the notation f(x) when expressing a function
Example(s):
Expressing the function y=x^2+1 as f(x)=x^2+1.
* Use the notation f(c) to determine the value of f(x) when x=c
Find the domain and range of a function and graph functions
* Define the domain as the set of all allowable values of x
* Define the range as the set of possible y-values as x varies over the domain of the function
Example(s):
Recognising and proving that the range of y=2-x^2 is y=2.
* Determine and describe the domain and range for a variety of functions
* Use graphing applications to graph and compare functions of the form y=f(x),  y=f(x)+c, y=f(x-b), y=kf(x) and y=f(ax), and describe their transformations
Example(s):
Using graphing applications, show that the graph of y=f(x)+5 is a vertical translation of the graph of y=f(x).
Graph regions corresponding to linear inequalities in one and 2 variables
* Graph linear inequalities of the form ax+by>c, testing whether the points satisfy the given inequality and shading appropriate regions
Example(s):
Graphing 2x+3y<24 and verifying the region using a test point such as (0,0).

Trigonometry C (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* applies Pythagoras' theorem and trigonometry to solve 3-dimensional problems and applies the sine, cosine and area rules to solve 2-dimensional problems, including bearings (Path: Stn, Adv) MA5-TRG-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Solve 3-dimensional problems involving right-angled triangles
* Apply Pythagoras' theorem to solve problems involving the lengths of the edges and diagonals of rectangular prisms and other 3-dimensional objects
Example(s):
Finding the longest pencil that fits in a rectangular box measuring 5 cm × 6 cm × 8 cm.
* Apply trigonometry to solve problems involving right-angled triangles in 3 dimensions, including using bearings and angles of elevation and depression
Apply the sine, cosine and area rules to any triangle and solve related problems
* Use graphing applications to verify the sine rule a/sin?A =b/sin?B =c/sin?C  and that the ratios of a side to the sine of the opposite angle is a constant
* Apply the sine rule in a given triangle ABC to find the value of an unknown side
* Apply the sine rule in a given triangle ABC to find the value of an unknown angle (ambiguous case excluded): sin?A/a=sin?B/b=sin?C/c
* Use graphing applications to verify the cosine rule c^2=a^2+b^2-2ab cos?C.
* Apply the cosine rule to find the unknown sides for a given triangle ABC.
* Rearrange the formula to deduce that cos?C=(a^2+ b^2- c^2)/2ab and use this to find an unknown angle
Example(s):
Rearranging to make cos?C the subject of the formula c^2=a^2+b^2-2ab cos?C.
* Use graphing applications to verify the area rule A=1/2 ab sin?C.
* Apply the formula A=1/2 ab sin?C, where a and b are the sides that form angle C to find the area of a given triangle  ABC
* Solve problems involving finding unknown angles or sides in triangles (excluding right-angled triangles) by selecting and applying the appropriate rule

Trigonometry D (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* establishes and applies the properties of trigonometric functions and finds solutions to trigonometric equations (Path: Adv) MA5-TRG-P-02
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Use the unit circle to define trigonometric functions and represent them graphically
* Redefine the sine and cosine ratios in terms of the unit circle
Example(s):

Image long description: A circle with radius 1 drawn is plotted on a Cartesian plane. The radius in the first quadrant touches the circle at cos theta, sin theta. A right-angled triangle is formed with the radius as the longest side.
* Verify that the tangent ratio can be expressed as a ratio of the sine and cosine ratios
Example(s):
Using the unit circle to establish:
Since sin??=opposite/hypotenuse=y    and    cos??=adjacent/hypotenuse=x

sin??/cos?? =(opposite/hypotenuse)/(adjacent/hypotenuse)=y/x

sin??/cos?? =y/x=opposite/adjacent=tan??.
* Use graphing applications to examine the sine, cosine and tangent ratios for (at least) 0^°=x=360^°, and graph the results
Example(s):
Using graphing applications to graph the sine, cosine and tangent curves, comparing their features including periodicity and symmetry, and describing how the value of each trigonometric ratio changes as the angle increases from  0^° to  360^°.
* Use graphing applications to examine graphs of the sine, cosine and tangent functions for angles of any magnitude, including negative angles
Example(s):
Using graphing applications, graph the sine, cosine and tangent curves, examining the periodic nature of trigonometric graphs.
* Use the unit circle or graphs of trigonometric functions to establish and apply the relationships sin??A=sin??(180°-A), cos??A=-cos??(180°-A), and tan??A=-tan??(180°-A) for obtuse angles when 0°=A=90°
* Establish and apply the relationship m=tan??, where m is the gradient of the line and ? is the angle of inclination of a line with the x -axis on the Cartesian plane 
Example(s):
Using the diagram below to verify the relationship m=tan??, applying the fact that: m=rise/run, m=2v3 and "tan " ?=2v3.

Image long description: A Cartesian plane with the upward sloping line y equals 2x plus 3 graphed, cutting the x-axis at minus root 3 over 2 and the y-axis at 3. The line forms angle theta with the x-axis.
Solve trigonometric equations using exact values and the relationships between supplementary and complementary angles
* Derive and apply the exact sine, cosine and tangent ratios for angles of 30°, 45° and  60°
Example(s):
Deriving the exact sine, cosine and tangent ratios for the angles of 30°, 45° and  60° using the following triangles.

Image long description: 2 triangles, one is an equilateral triangle that is split into 2 equal right-angled triangles with sides 1, root 3 and hypotenuse of 2. The second triangle is a 45-degree isosceles triangle with sides of 1, 1 and a hypotenuse of root 2.
* Verify and use the relationships between the sine and cosine ratios of complementary angles in right-angled triangles: sin?A=cos??(90°-A)? and cos?A=sin?(90°-A)
Example(s):

* Find the possible acute and/or obtuse angles, given a trigonometric ratio
* Apply the sine rule and area rule to find angles involving the ambiguous case
Example(s):
Finding the possible sizes of ?ACB, given AB=10 cm, AC=6 cm and ?ABC=35^° and demonstrating that 2 solutions are possible.


Area and surface area B (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* applies knowledge of the surface area of right pyramids and cones, spheres and composite solids to solve problems (Path: Stn, Adv) MA5-ARE-P-01
Related Life Skills outcomes: MALS-ARE-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Solve problems involving surface areas
* Identify the perpendicular heights and slant heights of right pyramids and right cones
Example(s):

Image long description: Two pyramids showing the difference between perpendicular height and slant height. Perpendicular height is drawn from the apex of the pyramid straight down the centre of the pyramid. Slant height is drawn from the apex of the pyramid to the middle of the side face.
* Apply Pythagoras' theorem to find the slant heights, base lengths and perpendicular heights of right pyramids and right cones
* Solve problems involving the surface areas of right pyramids and compare methods of solution
Example(s):
Drawing the net of a pyramid and describing the surface area as the sum of the areas of the triangular faces and the base shape.
UuM10
* Apply the formula to find the curved surface area of right cones: A=prl, where r is the length of the radius and l is the slant height
Example(s):
Examining how the formula for the curved surface area of a cone is developed from the area of a circle, using concrete materials, digital tools or algebraic techniques.UuM10
* Apply the formula to find the surface area of spheres: A= ?4pr?^2, where r is the length of the radius
* Solve problems involving the surface area of solids in a variety of contexts including composite solids
Example(s):
Finding the surface area of a solid composed of a cone with a radius of 3 cm, slant height of 10 cm and a hemisphere attached to the base.


Volume B (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* applies knowledge of the volume of right pyramids, cones and spheres to solve problems involving related composite solids (Path: Stn, Adv) MA5-VOL-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Solve problems involving volumes
* Find the volume of right pyramids and right cones by using an appropriate formula: volume of pyramid or cone V=1/3 Ah, where A is the base area and h is the perpendicular height
* Find the volume of spheres by using an appropriate formula: volume of sphere V=4/3 pr^3, where r is the length of the radius
* Apply knowledge of right pyramids, right cones and hemispheres to solve problems involving composite solids
* Solve practical problems related to the volumes and capacities of solids including right pyramids, right cones and spheres
Example(s):
Determining the volume and capacity (in litres) of the hopper bin funnel below.

Image long description: A rectangular prism of length and width of 30 cm and a height of 1.2 m. A square pyramid of perpendicular height 90 cm is attached to one end of the rectangular prism.UuM10

Properties of geometrical figures B (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* establishes conditions for congruent triangles and similar triangles and solves problems relating to properties of similar figures and plane shapes (Path: Ext) MA5-GEO-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Identify and explain congruence
* Identify figures as congruent figures if translations, reflections and rotations can move one figure exactly on top of another
Example(s):
Recognising congruent figures in tessellations, art and designs.
* Match the sides and angles of 2 congruent polygons
* Indicate 2 polygons are congruent using the symbol (=) and name the vertices in matching order 
* Determine that having equal radii is the condition for 2 circles to be congruent
Develop and use the conditions for congruent triangles
* Establish the 4 congruence tests for triangles (SSS, SAS, AAS and RHS)
Example(s):
Examining and reasoning why SSA and AAA are not valid congruency tests.UGP7
* Use the congruence tests to identify a pair of congruent triangles from a selection of 2 or more triangles
Example(s):
Identifying which 2 triangles are congruent from the following set:

Image long description: First triangle has longest side at 10 and shortest side at 5. Second triangle has longest side 10 and other side root 75. Third triangle has shortest side 5 and other side 8.
Develop and apply the minimum conditions for triangles to be similar
* Examine the minimum conditions needed and establish the 4 tests for 2 triangles to be similar
Example(s):
Tests to establish whether 2 triangles are similar
If 3 sides of a triangle are proportional to 3 sides of another triangle, then they are similar.
If 2 sides of a triangle are proportional to 2 sides of another triangle, and the included angles are equal, then they are similar.
If 2 angles of a triangle are equal to 2 angles of another triangle, then they are similar (equiangular).
If the hypotenuse and a second side of a right-angled triangle are proportional to the hypotenuse and a second side of another right-angled triangle, then they are similar.UGP7
* Apply the minimum conditions needed and determine whether 2 triangles are similar using an appropriate test
Establish and apply properties of similar shapes and solids
* Establish for 2 similar figures with similarity ratio a:b that their areas are in the ratio a^2:b^2 and their volumes are in the ratio a^3:b^3
* Solve problems involving areas and volumes of similar shapes and solids
UGP7, UuM10
Apply logical reasoning to numerical problems involving plane shapes
* Apply geometrical facts, properties and relationships to find the sizes of unknown sides and angles of plane shapes in diagrams, providing appropriate reasons
Example(s):
Explaining why the longest side of a triangle is always opposite the largest angle.

Explaining why the sum of the lengths of 2 sides of a triangle must be greater than the length of the third side.UGP6
* Define the exterior angle of a convex polygon
Example(s):
Representing exterior angles of a convex polygon using a diagram:

* Establish the sum of the exterior angles of any convex polygon is 360° and verify this result
Example(s):
Establishing a pattern by observing regular polygons and examining the sum of the exterior angles.

Image long description: A triangle marked up with the symbol for equal lines. Each line extends past the point of the triangle and has an exterior angle of 120 degrees. A square marked up with the symbol for equal lines. Each line extends past the corner of the square. Each interior angle is marked with the symbol for 90 degrees, and the exterior angles are also labelled 90 degrees.
* Apply the result for the sum of the interior angles of a triangle to find, by dissection, the sum of the interior angles of a polygon with more than 3 sides
Example(s):
Deriving the formula for the sum of the interior angles of a polygon =(n-2)×180^°by dissecting different polygons into triangles.
UGP6
* Apply the results for the interior and exterior angles of polygons to solve problems involving polygons

Properties of geometrical figures C (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* constructs proofs involving congruent triangles and similar triangles and proves properties of plane shapes (Path: Ext) MA5-GEO-P-02
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Construct formal proofs involving congruent and similar triangles
* Construct formal proofs of the congruence of triangles, preserving the matching order of vertices and drawing relevant conclusions
Example(s):
Constructing a formal proof for ?BAC=?DAC:
In ?ABC and ?ADC,
AC is a common side
AB=AD (given)
?ACB=?ACD=90^°(given)
??ABC=?ADC (RHS)
Hence ?BAC=?DAC (corresponding angles in congruent triangles).

* Construct formal proofs of the similarity of triangles, preserving the matching order of vertices and drawing relevant conclusions
Apply logical reasoning to proofs involving plane shapes
* Recognise that a definition is the minimum amount of information needed to identify a particular figure
* Prove the properties of isosceles and equilateral triangles and special quadrilaterals from the formal definition of the shapes
Example(s):
Formal definitions of some shapes
A scalene triangle is a triangle with no 2 sides equal in length.
An isosceles triangle is a triangle with 2 sides equal in length.
An equilateral triangle is a triangle with all sides equal in length.
A trapezium is a quadrilateral with at least one pair of opposite sides parallel.
A parallelogram is a quadrilateral with both pairs of opposite sides parallel.
A rhombus is a parallelogram with 2 adjacent sides equal in length.
A rectangle is a parallelogram with one angle a right angle.
A square is a rectangle with 2 adjacent sides equal.
* Prove and apply theorems and properties related to triangles and quadrilaterals
Example(s):
Theorems and properties related to triangles and quadrilaterals
The sum of the interior angles of a triangle is 180°.
The exterior angle of a triangle is equal to the sum of the 2 interior opposite angles.
If 2 sides of a triangle are equal, then the angles opposite those sides are equal. Conversely, if 2 angles of a triangle are equal, then the sides opposite those angles are equal.
Each angle of an equilateral triangle is equal to 60°.
The sum of the interior angles of a quadrilateral is 360°.
The opposite angles of a parallelogram are equal.
The opposite sides of a parallelogram are equal.
The diagonals of a parallelogram bisect each other.
The diagonals of a rhombus bisect each other at right angles.
The diagonals of a rhombus bisect the vertex angles through which they pass.
The diagonals of a rectangle are equal.
* Prove and apply tests for quadrilaterals
Example(s):
Tests for quadrilaterals
If both pairs of opposite angles of a quadrilateral are equal, then the quadrilateral is a parallelogram.
If both pairs of opposite sides of a quadrilateral are equal, then the quadrilateral is a parallelogram.
If all sides of a quadrilateral are equal, then the quadrilateral is a rhombus.
* Solve numerical and non-numerical problems in Euclidean geometry based on known assumptions and proven theorems

Circle geometry (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* applies deductive reasoning to prove circle theorems and solve related problems (Path: Ext) MA5-CIR-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Prove and apply angle and chord properties of circles
* Apply terminology associated with angles in circles
Example(s):
Defining and indicating on a diagram the meanings of the terms subtend, standing on the same arc, angle at the centre, angle at the circumference and angle in a segment.
* Identify the arc on which an angle at the centre or circumference stands
Example(s):

Image long description: A circle with 2 radii touching the circle at 2 points and lines from those 2 points touching the circle at the same point on the opposite side of the shape. The arc is shown between the 2 points the radii touch, the angle at the centre is indicated between the 2 radii and the angle at circumference is indicated between the 2 lines on the opposite side of the circle.
* Demonstrate that at any point on a circle there is a unique tangent to the circle, and that this tangent is perpendicular to the radius at the point of contact
* Prove chord properties of circles
Example(s):
Chord properties of circles
Equal chords of a circle subtend equal angles at the centre.
The perpendicular from the centre of a circle to a chord bisects the chord.
The line from the centre of a circle to the midpoint of a chord is perpendicular to the chord.
The perpendicular bisector of a chord of a circle passes through the centre.
Given any 3 non-collinear points, the point of intersection of the perpendicular bisectors of any 2 sides of the triangle formed by the 3 points is the centre of the circle through all 3 points.
When 2 circles intersect, the line joining their centres bisects their common chord at right angles.
* Prove angle properties of circles
Example(s):
Angle properties of circles
The angle at the centre of a circle is twice the angle at the circumference, standing on the same arc.
The angle in a semicircle is a right angle.
Angles at the circumference, standing on the same arc, are equal.
The opposite angles of cyclic quadrilaterals are supplementary.
An exterior angle at a vertex of a cyclic quadrilateral is equal to the interior opposite angle.
* Apply chord and angle properties of circles to find unknown angles and lengths in diagrams
Example(s):
Finding the length of AC if AB=14 cm, giving reasons:

AC=1/2 AB (line through centre perpendicular to a chord bisects the chord)
=1/2×14 cm
=7 cm

Finding the value of x giving reasons:

x=32^° (angles at the circumference standing on the same arc are equal)
Prove and apply tangent and secant properties of circles
* Prove tangent and secant properties of circles
Example(s):
Tangent and secant properties of circles
The 2 tangents drawn to a circle from an external point are equal in length.
The angle between a tangent and a chord drawn to the point of contact is equal to the angle in the alternate segment.
When 2 circles touch, their centres and the point of contact are collinear.
The products of the intercepts of 2 intersecting chords of a circle are equal.
The products of the intercepts of 2 intersecting secants to a circle from an external point are equal.
The square of a tangent to a circle from an external point equals the product of the intercepts of any secants from the point.
* Apply tangent and secant properties of circles to find unknown angles and lengths in diagrams
Example(s):
Finding the value of x if PT is a tangent, giving reasons:

?PT?^2=PC×PB (square of tangent is equal to the product of the intercepts of the secant)
x^2=4(4+12)
x^2=64
?x=8 (x>0)

Introduction to networks (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* solves problems involving the characteristics of graphs/networks, planar graphs and Eulerian trails and circuits (Path: Stn) MA5-NET-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Examine and describe a graph/network
* Describe a network as a collection of objects (nodes or vertices) interconnected by lines (edges) that can represent systems in the real world
* Examine real-world applications of networks such as social networks, supply chain networks and communication infrastructure, and explore other applications of networks
* Explain that the terms graph and network are interchangeable
Example(s):
Applying the term graph when referring to abstract entities in mathematical settings and the term network to relate graphs to real-world systems.
* Identify and define elements of a graph including vertex, edge and degree
Example(s):

Image long description: A square with 2 diagonals drawn and points on all intersections of lines. A corner of the square has degree of 3, the edges are the diagonals and sides of the square, the vertices are the corners of the square and the point where the diagonals intersect has a degree of 4.
* Explain that a given graph can be drawn in different ways
Example(s):
Explaining that as long as the vertices and their respective connections are the same, graphs can be drawn in different ways.

Define a planar graph and apply Euler's formula for planar graphs
* Define a planar graph as any graph that can be drawn in the plane so that no 2 edges cross
Example(s):

* Define a non-planar graph as a graph that can never be drawn in the plane without some edges crossing
Example(s):

* Demonstrate that some graphs that have crossing edges are still planar if they can be redrawn so that no 2 edges cross
Example(s):

* Identify the number of faces in a planar graph
Example(s):
Finding the number of faces in a planar representation when redrawing a graph and noting that the face external to the graph is known as the infinite face. 

Image long description: Graph A B C D E has 5 vertices and 7 edges and is drawn so that edges cross in multiple places. Graph A B C D E is redrawn so that no edges cross and 4 faces result, including the area outside of the shape.
* Describe and apply Euler's formula for planar graphs: v-e+f=2, where v = vertices,  e = edges and f = faces
Example(s):
Verifying that Euler's formula holds for the planar graph below:
v-e+f=2
 5-7+4=2
? Euler's formula holds


Image long description: Graph A B C D E has 5 vertices and 7 edges and is drawn so that no edges cross and 4 faces result including the area outside of the shape.
Explain the concept of Eulerian trails and circuits in the context of the Königsberg bridges problem
* Explain that a connected graph is a graph that is in one piece, so that any 2 vertices are connected by a path
Example(s):

Image long description: The first graph has 5 vertices joined by edges and second graph has 4 vertices joined by edges and one vertex not joined.
* Define a walk on a graph to be a sequence of vertices and edges of a graph
Example(s):

Image long description: 2 graphs with 5 vertices labelled A B C D E demonstrate different walks. Walk A B D C has edges AB, BD and DC highlighted. Walk B D E A C D B A has all edges highlighted.
* Explain the difference between trail, circuit, path and cycle
Example(s):

Image long description: Graph A C H G L has 5 vertices and 8 edges that do not cross. A is connected to C and L. L is connected to C, A and G. G is connected to L, C and H. H is connected to C and G. C is connected to A, L, G and H.

A trail is a walk where all edges are distinct or used once; however, vertices may repeat (A - L - C - G - H - C). 
A circuit is a trail that begins and ends on the same vertex (A - L - C - G - H - C - A). 
A path is a walk where vertices and edges are distinct or used only once (A - L - C - G - H).
A cycle is a closed path that starts and finishes at the same vertex (A - L - C - G - A).
* Relate the definition of a trail to an Eulerian trail as a walk in which every edge in the graph is included exactly once
* Relate the definition of a circuit to an Eulerian circuit that is defined as an Eulerian trail that ends at its starting point
* Relate Euler's Seven Bridges of Königsberg network problem to the definition of an Eulerian trail or circuit

Data analysis C (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* plans, conducts and reviews a statistical inquiry into a question of interest (Path: Stn, Adv) MA5-DAT-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Plan and conduct a statistical inquiry into a question of interest
* Design an aim and hypothesis based on a question of interest
* Apply ethical and efficient methods for gathering and organising data
* Produce a report containing multiple data visualisations that provide insights and information
Examine reports of studies in digital media and elsewhere for information on their planning and implementation
* Examine and evaluate the appropriateness of sampling methods and sample size in reports with statements about a population and how they can affect the results of a survey
Example(s):
Comparing different sampling methods, such as random, systematic, stratified and self-selected, and explaining how each of these could affect the results of a particular survey.

Examining sampling methods used to track biodiversity of native species in the local area.
* Critically review surveys, polls and media reports for accuracy and/or bias
IRD8
* Examine the use of statistics and the associated probabilities in shaping decisions made by governments and companies

Probability B (Path)
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* solves problems involving Venn diagrams, 2-way tables and conditional probability (Path: Adv) MA5-PRO-P-01
Content
Stn (Standard), Adv (Advanced) and Ext (Extension) have been used to suggest paths for related Stage 6 courses.
Solve problems involving Venn diagrams and 2-way tables
* Represent and interpret data in Venn diagrams for mutually exclusive and non-mutually exclusive events
UnC5
* Construct Venn diagrams to represent all possible combinations of 2 attributes from given or collected data
UnC5
* Interpret data in 2-way tables to represent relationships between attributes
Example(s):
Interpreting survey data of 100 people to determine the number of people who play an instrument and play a sport.

Image long description: 22 people play a sport and play an instrument. 48 people play a sport but do not play an instrument. 13 people do not play sport but play an instrument. 17 people do not play sport and do not play an instrument.UnC5
* Construct 2-way tables to represent the relationships between attributes
UnC5
* Convert between representations of the relationships between 2 attributes in Venn diagrams and 2-way tables
Example(s):
Transferring information from the Venn diagram below (left) to the 2-way table below (right).

Image long description: First example demonstrates a Venn diagram with intersecting circles C and D. The number inside the intersection is 4, the C circle has 17 and the D circle has 9. The number 10 is outside both circles. Second example demonstrates that 4 elements are for C and D. 17 elements for C and not D. 9 elements for Not C and D and 10 elements for Not C and Not D.UnC5
* Define a set as a collection of distinct objects
* Use Venn diagrams, set language and notation for events, including A-? (or A^' or A^c) for the complement of an event A, AnB for 'A and B' (the intersection of events A and B) and A?B for 'A or B' (the union of events A and B) and recognise mutually exclusive events
Example(s):
Shading a region on a Venn diagram to represent (AnB) ?C.

Use the language, 'if ... then', 'given', 'of' and 'knowing that', to examine conditional statements and identify common mistakes in interpreting the language
* Calculate the probabilities of events where a condition restricts the sample space
Example(s):
Calculating the probability that a resulting number is 3, given that a number less than 5 has been rolled on an unbiased 6-sided die.
* Describe the effect of a given condition on the sample space
Example(s):
Demonstrating that the sample space is reduced to {1, 2, 3, 4}, given that a number less than 5 has been rolled on an unbiased 6-sided die.
* Identify conditional statements used in descriptions of chance situations
Example(s):
Identifying the term given in the statement 'Finding the probability that a student chosen at random was born on a Saturday given that they were born on a weekend' as indicating the condition.
* Explain the validity of conditional statements when describing chance situations, referring to dependent and independent events
Example(s):
Explaining why if you toss a coin and get a tail, then the probability of getting a tail on the next toss is the same.UnC6
* Identify and explain common misconceptions relating to chance experiments
UnC6
Describe mutually and non-mutually exclusive events using specific language and calculate related probabilities
* Explain the difference between mutually exclusive and non-mutually exclusive events
Example(s):
Using Venn diagrams to represent that when tossing a coin, it is not possible to get heads and tails at the same time. Using Venn diagrams to represent that it is possible to like cats, dogs or both cats and dogs.

Image long description: Tossing a coin is the mutually exclusive event and is represented by 2 circles that do not overlap. One circle is labelled 'Heads', the other 'Tails'. Liking cats and dogs is the non-mutually exclusive event represented by a Venn diagram with 2 intersecting circles, one labelled 'Likes cats', the other 'Likes dogs'. The overlap is labelled 'Likes cats and dogs'.
* Describe compound events using the terms inclusive or and exclusive or
Example(s):
Recognising that the word or on its own often needs a qualifier, such as both or not both to determine inclusivity or exclusivity. Or without a qualifier usually denotes the inclusive or for non-mutually exclusive events.UnC5, UnC6
* Describe non-mutually exclusive events using the terminology and, inclusive or and exclusive or
Example(s):
Identifying language that is common to non-mutually exclusive events, such as 25 students play both basketball and football, 46 students play basketball or football, but not both, 19 students play neither sport, and 71 students play basketball or football or both and representing this using a Venn diagram.

Image long description: Venn diagram shows 2 intersecting circles. One circle represents the number of students who play basketball (12), the second circle represents the number of students who play football (34). The space where the 2 circles overlap represents the number of students who play both sports (25). Outside the Venn diagram, but inside the rectangle represents the number of students who do not play either sport (19).UnC6
* Describe events using the terms at least, at most, not and and
Example(s):
Identifying the terminology in situations such as rolling a standard 6-sided die and finding the probability of rolling at least a 5, at most a 3, not rolling a 5, and rolling a 4 and a 5.UnC6
* Calculate the probability of compound events using strategies including Venn diagrams and 2-way tables
UnC5, UnC6

Life Skills for Stages 4/5
Life Skills table of outcomes
MAO-WM-01 Working mathematically
develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly
This outcome is aligned to all content in each Stage.
Focus areaLife Skills for Stages 4/5Language of number
MALS-LAN-01 
recognises language that represents number

MALS-LAN-02 
responds to and uses language that represents numberCounting
MALS-COU-01 
counts in everyday contextsRepresenting number
MALS-REP-01 
represents number in everyday contextsComparing and ordering
MALS-COM-01 
compares and orders numbersFractions
MALS-FRC-01 
demonstrates knowledge of fractions in everyday contextsDecimals and percentages
MALS-DEP-01 
demonstrates knowledge of decimals and percentages in everyday contextsAddition and subtraction
MALS-ADS-01 
uses strategies for addition and subtractionMultiplication and division
MALS-MDI-01 
uses strategies for multiplication and divisionRecognising money
MALS-FIN-01 
demonstrates knowledge of money in everyday contextsFinancial management
MALS-FIN-02 
plans and manages personal financesPatterns
MALS-PAT-01 
recognises and applies patterns in everyday contextsRecognising and interpreting time

Includes:

Recognising time

Interpreting time

MALS-TIM-01 
demonstrates knowledge of time in everyday contexts

MALS-TIM-02 
organises and measures time in everyday contextsLength
MALS-LEN-01 
measures and uses length in everyday contextsVolume, capacity and mass
MALS-VOL-01 
measures and uses volume, capacity and mass in everyday contextsArea
MALS-ARE-01 
measures and uses area in everyday contextsGeometry
MALS-GEO-01 
explores 2-dimensional shapes and 3-dimensional objectsPosition
MALS-POS-01 
demonstrates knowledge of position and direction in everyday contextsRepresenting data
MALS-DAT-01 
recognises and represents data in everyday contextsInterpreting data
MALS-DAT-02 
interprets information from data displaysChance and probability
MALS-PRO-01 
applies chance and probability to everyday events
Life Skills outcomes and content for Stage 4/5
Language of number
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* recognises language that represents number MALS-LAN-01
* responds to and uses language that represents number MALS-LAN-02
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-INT-C-01
Content
Respond to language related to number
* Recognise language representing quantities
Example(s):
Using words such as some, most, few, more, and less to represent quantities.

Recognising the group which has 'more' of a favourite item and choosing that when presented with more or less.
* Respond to language used to describe quantities
Example(s):
Using words such as some, any, most, few, several, a lot and a little bit.

Indicating that most people are wearing blue by pointing to, looking at or selecting the colour.

Responding to questions about whether all students are here today, using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words.
* Compare amounts using language that describes number
Example(s):
Using words such as more, less, fewer, greater, bigger and smaller.

Comparing 2 recipes and identifying which has fewer ingredients.

Distributing equipment for an art activity, making sure everyone gets the same amount.
* Recognise how languages other than English, including Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Languages, use language related to number
Example(s):
Counting or using number words in Aboriginal Languages.

Mob, meaning many, or big lot, meaning large group, in Aboriginal English.
Recognise number words
* Recognise numbers
Example(s):
Identifying the number when presented with a choice between a number and an object that is not a number, using eye gaze, pointing to, or verbally identifying.
* Respond to directions involving number words
Example(s):
Selecting 4 cups by pointing to or moving 4 cups from a group of cups, or selecting a picture of 4 cups using eye gaze, gesture or speech.

Returning 2 items to a bag using physical objects or technology.

Playing 5 beats of music using objects, technology, musical instruments or body percussion.
* Use number words to communicate meaning
Example(s):
Using words, images, technology or verbal responses to communicate, such as 'I bought 4 apples and 6 bottles of water from the shop'.

Recognising that, 'I went to the shop twice' and 'I went to the shop 2 times' have the same meaning.

Matching illustrations of an empty tub to the word zero to demonstrate that zero is equivalent to nothing and none.
Recognise ordinal terms
* Respond to directions using ordinal terms
Example(s):
Giving a ball to the first person in each row.

Pressing the switch when the cursor lands on the third image on the screen.
* Use ordinal terms in everyday contexts
Example(s):
'My birthday is on the fifth of November.'

'Is the office on the first or second floor?'

'First, unpack the bag. Second, complete the schedule of activities. Third, open the computer.'

Counting
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* counts in everyday contexts MALS-COU-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-INT-C-01
Content
Use a variety of counting strategies
* Count forwards and backwards from a given number
Example(s):
Identifying the next 3 consecutive numbers from a given number, using gestures, facial expressions, pictures, symbols or words.

Pressing the switch to count from 11 to 30.
* Count with 1:1 correspondence
Example(s):
Cutting a cake so each person at a party gets one slice.

Using 1:1 correspondence to match sounds, beats, words, pitches, and speed or tempo, using voice, own body, objects or instruments.
* Apply cardinality to demonstrate that the last number spoken in a counting sequence names the quantity for that set
Example(s):
Counting a set of 4 objects, sounds, images or movements and identifying the quantity as 4 by using gestures, facial expressions, pictures, symbols or words.
* Apply counting skills to single-digit, 2-digit and 3-digit numbers
Example(s):
Counting the number of tablespoons for an ingredient in a recipe.

Counting the number of players in a sports team.
* Count by twos, fives, tens and hundreds
Example(s):
Counting the number of socks in pairs: 2, 4, 6, 8.

Counting tally marks presented in sets of 5.

Counting rows on a 100s chart or sets of 10 frames.

Applying skip-counting skills to count $10 notes to $70.
* Count forwards and backwards from zero
Example(s):
Using a number line to count forwards and backwards.

Using a thermometer to identify positive and negative numbers.
* Solve problems involving counting
Example(s):
Calculating how many more drumsticks are needed if there are 10 drums, 6 drumsticks and each drum needs one drumstick.

Identifying missing numbers in a number line by using gestures, facial expressions, pictures, symbols or words.

Representing number
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* represents number in everyday contexts MALS-REP-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-INT-C-01
Content
Recognise numbers in everyday contexts
* Recognise the numbers 0 to 9
Example(s):
Dialling a phone number using a number pad on a phone or keyboard, or by using voice recognition or eye-gaze technology.

Locating numbers on the keyboard of a device.

Matching numbers 0 to 9 with their corresponding amounts, using images, sounds, objects or movements.
* Recognise 2-digit numbers
Example(s):
Locating 15 September on a calendar.

Using a digital scale to measure 50 g.

Using base 10 blocks to represent 2-digit numbers.
* Recognise odd and even numbers
Example(s):
Locating house numbers.

Selecting a pack of 6 tennis balls to share with one other person rather than a pack of 3.
* Identify ways numbers are used in everyday life
Example(s):
Recognising bus numbers, bus stop numbers and platform numbers using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words.

Demonstrating using a security code on a bank card, digital device or lock.

Setting the timer on a microwave.
* Instantly recognise the number of items in a group without counting (subitise)
Example(s):
Rolling a die and recognising the number.

Identifying the number of $1 coins from a collection of coins for a small purchase worth up to $5.
Apply numbers in everyday contexts
* Record numbers
Example(s):
Recording single-digit, 2-digit and 3-digit numbers by matching numbers to objects, recording numbers or recounting verbally.

Recording appointment times on a physical or digital calendar by writing or selecting the times.

Recording phone numbers by writing or using technology such as a keyboard or mobile phone to type, write or audio record.
* Use numbers in everyday contexts
Example(s):
Writing or selecting numbers, or using speech-to-text technology, to enter a date of birth on a form.

Using a PIN to access a bank account.

Locating seat numbers in a theatre or cinema.

Identifying the cost of an item by locating the price on a price tag.
* Identify a range of number configurations
Example(s):
Recognising Roman numerals on a clock face by pointing to the numeral, matching the Roman numeral to a number, or saying the corresponding number.

Participating in games with dice and dominoes.

Comparing and ordering
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* compares and orders numbers MALS-COM-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-INT-C-01
Content
Estimate and compare amounts
* Compare the number of items in a group to solve problems
Example(s):
Matching the number of hats to the number of people to determine if everyone will get one to wear.

Comparing the number of magazines in 2 sets and deciding which set to give to the larger group.
* Estimate and compare quantities of items
Example(s):
Indicating which bowl has the most coins in it by using eye gaze, pointing to it or verbally selecting it.

Using the table, estimate the number of shells collected over 2 weeks.

Image long description: Week 1: 27 shells collected on Monday, 3 shells collected on Tuesday, 19 shells collected on Wednesday, 12 shells collected on Thursday, 9 shells collected on Friday, zero shells collected on Saturday, 11 shells collected on Sunday. Week 2: 8 shells collected on Monday, 7 shells collected on Tuesday, 3 shells collected on Wednesday, 4 shells collected on Thursday, 1 shell collected on Friday, 23 shells collected on Saturday, 11 shells collected on Sunday.
Order according to numerical value
* Order groups of objects in ascending or descending order
Example(s):
Ordering collections of everyday objects of different quantities from most to least and least to most, using real objects or moving digital representations of objects, or by naming or recording the objects in the correct order.
* Order numbers
Example(s):
Ordering single-digit, 2-digit and 3-digit numbers using numbers on a number line or moving digital representations of numbers, or by naming or recording the numbers in the correct order.

Ordering teams in a competition based on points scored by writing team names in order, using technology to order teams, or verbally naming the teams in order.
* Use ordinal terms
Example(s):
Identifying sporting teams that came first, second, third and fourth on a competition ladder, using gestures or facial expressions, or by verbally or physically selecting the teams as each position is called.

Recognising starting positions in a motor race by matching ordinal terms to starting positions, and typing, writing or verbally recounting the matches.
* Identify the value of a given number in relation to other numbers
Example(s):
Locating numbers on a number line according to their value.

Determining which of 3 local landmarks is closest to a school by selecting or naming the landmarks from a map.
* Demonstrate understanding of values greater than, equal to and less than zero
Example(s):
Recognising the terms used to describe temperature in weather reports, including 10 ?, below freezing and minus 3 ?, using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words to identify this on a number line or thermometer.

Using a thermometer or matching images to numbers to recognise the difference in temperatures that are freezing and boiling.

Recognising if a bank balance is in credit or debit by matching the amount on a number line and identifying if the amount is greater than, equal to or less than zero dollars.

Fractions
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* demonstrates knowledge of fractions in everyday contexts MALS-FRC-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-FRC-C-01
Content
Identify the fraction 'a half' in everyday contexts
* Recognise halves
Example(s):
Cutting a length of rope into 2 equal pieces.

Identifying items that are less than a half or more than a half by pointing to or naming items, or by grouping objects.
* Apply the terms half and halves
Example(s):
Recognising a television program is half an hour long by selecting from a schedule of programs or naming programs.

Following instructions to move to the other half of the soccer field.
Identify the fraction 'a quarter' in everyday contexts
* Recognise quarters
Example(s):
Cutting a cake into 4 equal pieces.

Identifying items that are less than a quarter or more than a quarter of a whole by pointing to or naming items, or by grouping objects.
* Apply the term quarter
Example(s):
Recognising that break time is a quarter of an hour by pointing to quarter of an hour, matching quarter of an hour to recess on a schedule or naming quarter of an hour.

Adding 3/4 of a tablespoon of salt to a recipe.
Identify fractions with different denominators in everyday contexts
* Recognise unit fractions
Example(s):
Matching, naming or selecting the fraction 1/5 when shown an image of 10 lollies being shared between 5 people.

Using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words to identify a bottle is 1/3 full.
* Recognise non-unit fractions where the numerator is a number other than one
Example(s):
Selecting 2/3 of a cup when following a recipe, using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words.

Matching, naming or selecting the fraction 3/4 when shown a petrol gauge that is 3/4 full.
Use fractions in everyday contexts
* Recognise fractions in everyday contexts
Example(s):
Adding 3/4 of a cup of flour to a recipe.

Recognising that if an item is half price, it is less than full price by selecting half-price items when asked which are less than full price, or by describing half-price items as less than full price.
* Compare fractions
Example(s):
Recognising that half of a pizza is more than a quarter of the pizza by selecting the piece representing half when asked which is more than a quarter.

Determining whether 2/3 of a glass of water is more or less than 1/2 a glass, using real or visual representations.
* Calculate fractions, with or without technology
Example(s):
Calculating the price of an item that is half price.

Calculating the number of minutes in 1/3 of an hour.
* Apply fractions to solve problems
Example(s):
Splitting the bill for lunch with 2 other people.

Making half of a recipe to serve fewer people.

Decimals and percentages
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* demonstrates knowledge of decimals and percentages in everyday contexts MALS-DEP-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-FRC-C-01
Content
Identify percentages
* Identify percentages in everyday contexts
Example(s):
Recognising coming to school for a full week as being 100% attendance by matching written or visual representations of attendance at school to the symbol for 100%.

Recognising discounts expressed as percentages in multimedia advertisements by pointing to, selecting or naming the discounts.

Recognising that a whole unit is 100% and that 50% is half of a whole unit, using objects, images or digital representations.
* Represent the size of percentages
Example(s):
Identifying 10% is less than 80%.

Selecting a visual representing 50%.

* Match percentages to common fractions
Example(s):
Matching percentages to the fractions 1/2, 1/4 and 3/4.
Use percentages
* Estimate using percentages in everyday contexts
Example(s):
Identifying an estimation for the chance of rain using a weather app.

Estimating a new wage after a 10% increase.
* Calculate percentages, with or without technology
Example(s):
Calculating 50% off the price of a pair of shoes.
* Apply percentages to solve problems
Example(s):
Calculating a 10% decrease in a sale.

Calculating a 20% increase in the cost of a season ticket.

Evaluating the number of sheep remaining if 10% of 200 sheep are sold.
Identify decimals
* Recognise decimal numbers in everyday contexts
Example(s):
Recognising decimals when using money involving cents and dollars by matching representations of $5.50 when $5.50 is named, or by correctly reading combinations of notes and coins, or by using written representations of amounts of money involving dollars and cents.

Recognising measurements written in decimal notation by pointing to, matching or correctly naming measurements such as 3.5 m and 2.4 kg.
* Matches decimals to common fractions
Example(s):
Matching decimals to the fractions 1/2, 1/4 and 3/4. 
Use decimals
* Estimate, using decimals, in everyday contexts
Example(s):
Estimating the cost of a trip by bus and train if the bus costs $2.95 and the train costs $4.95

Estimating the length of material for artwork to the nearest cm.
* Calculate decimals, with or without technology
Example(s):
Calculating 0.5 of ingredients to make a recipe for half the number of people.

5 friends are going to the cinema. It will cost $10.50 per person. How much will it cost in total?

Rounding $6.90 to the nearest dollar to inform which coins or notes to pay with.

Addition and subtraction
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* uses strategies for addition and subtraction MALS-ADS-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-INT-C-01, MA4-RAT-C-01, MA4-EQU-C-01, MA5-EQU-C-01
Content
Identify the language used in addition and subtraction
* Apply the language of addition and subtraction in everyday contexts
Example(s):
Recognising the difference between scores in a computer game by pointing to or naming who scored more or less, or by matching names to scores.
* Recognise and use the symbols +, - and =
Example(s):
Selecting the correct symbol from a group of examples and non-examples, using gestures, facial expressions or words.

Using the correct symbols to write a number sentence that represents how many soccer balls are left after each person takes one.
Apply strategies for addition
* Model addition to solve problems
Example(s):
Combining 2 or more groups of objects to find the total number of objects.

Modelling addition using representations such as tens frames, number lines or multibase arithmetic blocks.
* Apply basic facts of addition, sums with 2 single digits, and their corresponding subtraction fact
Example(s):
Completing the sums 9+9=18 and 18-9=9.
* Add 2 numbers
Example(s):
Counting on from the larger number of 2 numbers to find the total of the 2 numbers, using concrete materials, number lines and/or mental strategies.

Using column addition, with or without renaming, to find the sum of 2 or more addends greater than 10 such as 63+28 and 1527+362.

Using a calculator or app to find the sum of 2 or more multi-digit addends.
* Estimate and check the sum of 2 numbers
Example(s):
Estimating the cost of buying 2 computer games and check it using a calculator.

Estimating the combined weight of a vehicle and its load.
* Calculate missing numbers in a number sentence
Example(s):
"$" 7 +¨= "$" 10

Calculating the difference in money if a person has $8 and wants to buy a sketchbook that costs $12.

"$" 8 + ¨= "$" 12
* Select and apply appropriate strategies for addition to solve problems in a range of contexts
Example(s):
Calculating the total cost of a lunch consisting of a $2.50 juice and a $4.50 sandwich.

Calculating the total rainfall in the summer months using data from a weather chart.

Using jump strategy to find the total cost of a jacket costing $46 and a t-shirt costing $33.

Apply strategies for subtraction
* Model subtraction to solve problems
Example(s):
Taking away some objects from a group to model subtraction.

Comparing 2 groups of objects to determine how many more objects are in the larger group.
* Subtract a number from another given number
Example(s):
Using objects to solve 6-3=¨.

Using a number line to count backwards from a given number.

Solving multi-digit subtraction problems, with or without a calculator.
* Estimate and check for subtraction
Example(s):
Estimating the change from the cost of lunch if the cost was $5.50 paid with a $10 note, and checking using a calculator.

Estimating how much more waste is thrown away than recycled each year in your local area, and checking it using a calculator.
* Calculate missing numbers in a number sentence
Example(s):
14 -¨=10

Calculating how many cakes have been sold at a cake stall if you started with 20 and there are 2 left.
* Select and apply appropriate strategies for subtraction to solve problems
Example(s):
Calculating the change from $10 for purchases totalling $3.50, using mental strategies, written processes and/or a calculator.

Determining the weight of a litre of water by subtracting the weight of the full container from the weight of the empty container.

Multiplication and division
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* uses strategies for multiplication and division MALS-MDI-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-INT-C-01, MA4-RAT-C-01, MA4-EQU-C-01, MA5-EQU-C-01
Content
Identify the language used in multiplication and division
* Respond to and use the language of multiplication and division in everyday contexts
Example(s):
Arranging chairs into 5 groups of 3 for 15 people.

Sharing $50 between 5 people.
* Recognise and use the symbols ×, ÷ and =
Example(s):
Matching the symbols +,-,× and÷ to the symbols or the names of the symbols.

Writing or representing a number sentence to calculate the cost of 20 balloons at $3 each.
Apply strategies for multiplication
* Model multiplication by recognising equal groups or multiples of items to solve problems
Example(s):
Combining the contents of 3 boxes, each containing 4 pencils, to find the total number of pencils.

Finding the total number of cards all players have at the start of a game if each player is dealt 7 cards.
* Multiply 2 numbers
Example(s):
Collecting groups of items from 2 or more people and determining how many items there are altogether.

Using equal jumps on a number line to multiply 2 numbers.

Multiplying numbers using an array of equal rows.

* Estimate and check the product of 2 numbers
Example(s):
Estimating the number of apples the school canteen has if it purchased 9 packs of 5 apples.

Estimating how many slices of pizza you will have if you order 3 pizzas for a party and cut each into 8 slices.
* Use single-digit multiplication to solve problems
Example(s):
Selecting 3 boxes, each with 5 pencils, for a class of 15 students using 3×5=15.
* Use commutative properties of numbers
Example(s):
Using 3×5=15 to establish that 5×3=15.
* Select and apply appropriate strategies for multiplication to solve problems
Example(s):
Determining the quantities of ingredients needed to prepare a meal for 5 people using a recipe based on ingredients for one person.
Apply strategies for division
* Model division by recognising equal groups to solve problems
Example(s):
Sharing 12 balls equally among 3 students.

Sharing a cake equally between 10 people.
* Divide 2 numbers
Example(s):
Sharing a number of items between 2 or more people, using concrete materials, number lines and/or mental strategies.

Dividing numbers using an array of equal rows, mental strategies, written processes and/or calculator strategies.

* Estimate the result when dividing 2 numbers
Example(s):
Estimating the cost of a single tennis ball from a pack of 6 that costs $15, and checking by performing the calculation or using a calculator.

Estimating your share of the cost when ordering takeaway with 3 friends if the bill of $33 is divided equally.
* Use multiplication and division as inverse operations
Example(s):
If 5×6=30 then 30÷6=5.
* Select and apply appropriate strategies for division to solve problems
Example(s):
Determining the quantities of ingredients needed when preparing a meal for one person using a recipe based on ingredients for 4 people.

Recognising money
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* demonstrates knowledge of money in everyday contexts MALS-FIN-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA5-FIN-C-01, MA5-FIN-C-02
Content
Recognise when money is used in everyday contexts
* Recognise when payment is needed for purchases
Example(s):
Selecting a payment method when making a purchase.
* Recognise symbols and signs in the community associated with money
Example(s):
Recognising contactless payment symbols by making a purchase using contactless payment or by matching payment symbols with the names of payment types.

Using price tags attached to clothing to identify the cost by pointing to, matching or naming the cost of real objects or images of clothing with price tags.

Recognising symbols for different currencies, such as Euros, by pointing to, naming or matching them to the names of currencies or countries.
* Respond to language used to describe money and purchases
Example(s):
Using words such as spend, buy, change, cash, credit and debit.

Making a purchase with cash at a shop when it is cash only.

Using dollars and cents to name the price of an item.

Reaching for, matching to sample, or selecting notes, coins or a card, when asked to make a payment.

Asking for or indicating that change is required when making a purchase.
Recognise different amounts of money
* Identify Australian coins and notes
Example(s):
Matching coins and notes.

Identifying the difference between 5c and $5 by matching, copying or commenting on features such as note or coin, colour or size.
* Recognise that different currencies are used around the world
Example(s):
Recognising there is a difference between Australian and American dollars by pointing to, matching or naming the currency when shown real or visual representations of Australian and American notes.

Choosing a country and researching the currency used there.
* Identify amounts in dollars and cents
Example(s):
Using a price tag to identify the cost of an item.

Explaining that the digits before the decimal point are the dollars and the numbers after the decimal point are the cents when reading money amounts.
* Record amounts in dollars and cents
Example(s):
Understanding that 35 cents can be written as 35c.

Understanding that 5 dollars is more often written as $5.
Compare and order money
* Recognise that coins and notes have different values
Example(s):
Recognising that a $2 coin is smaller in size but greater in value than a 20c coin by pointing to, matching or naming the coin when asked which is smaller and which is greater in value.

Recognising that $5 is worth more than 50c by pointing to, matching or naming the $5 note, or a visual representation of $5, when shown a $5 note and 50c coin and asked which is worth more.
* Order coins and notes
Example(s):
Identifying whether a coin or note is worth more or less than another by pointing to, using eye gaze, or selecting or naming the coin or note when asked which is worth more.

Ordering items according to their value by pointing to or ordering visual representations of soft drink = $5, football = $10, computer game = $50, or by writing or naming the order.

Financial management
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* plans and manages personal finances MALS-FIN-02
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA5-FIN-C-01, MA5-FIN-C-02
Content
Purchase goods or services
* Use an appropriate payment method
Example(s):
Identifying an appropriate payment method to make an online purchase, such as credit card or gift card.

Selecting an appropriate payment method to use in a shop, such as cash or credit card.
* Recognise language associated with financial management
Example(s):
Using words such as goal, savings, debt, budget, credit and interest.

Pointing to, matching to sample, selecting, saying or writing the price of an item when asked for the price or cost.

Reaching for, matching to sample, or selecting notes and coins to demonstrate a savings plan.

Planning to make a purchase within a budget.
* Make informed decisions about purchases
Example(s):
Requesting a receipt as proof of a purchase.

When told something is too expensive, choosing a cheaper option.
* Demonstrate knowledge about the cost of goods and/or services
Example(s):
Comparing the cost of catching the bus to school and going on a plane to another country.

Buying lunch with a budget of $10.
* Recognise the value of money when making purchases
Example(s):
When buying a chocolate bar priced at $1.50, giving the next whole dollar amount greater than the price, ie $2, and waiting for the change.

Knowing that if you want to buy a new games console, you will have to save for it.

Understanding that you don't wait for change when paying by card or using digital forms of payment.
Estimate with money
* Estimate amounts of money needed to purchase goods or services
Example(s):
Selecting a $2 coin to pay for a drink or snack and a $20 note to pay for a t-shirt.

Estimating that a $50 note will be needed to pay for several items at a supermarket.
* Estimate the amount of change due
Example(s):
Approximating how much change would be given from a $10 note when buying a bottle of orange juice for $4.55.

Using estimation to determine if the change received from a purchase is correct.
Identify personal finances
* Recognise sources of personal finance
Example(s):
Identifying where money comes from, including allowance and money received for chores by pointing to, selecting, matching or naming sources of income from a list.

Differentiating between money provided by earnings, government payments, gifts or pocket money.
* Identify essential personal purchases
Example(s):
Sorting and prioritising goods and services.
Demonstrate understanding of managing personal finance
* Keep money in a secure location
Example(s):
Using a bank account.

Putting a wallet containing money in a locked drawer.
* Track income and spending
Example(s):
Checking bank statements via devices.

Naming transactions on an account for withdrawals and deposits.

Checking the balance of an account to identify if funds are available to spend or withdraw.
* Calculate expenses with available funds
Example(s):
Calculating what is available to spend on leisure activities from a weekly wage after essential payments have been made.

Developing a budget, with or without technology, to meet personal financial needs.
* Respond to financial terms
Example(s):
Locating the BSB and account number on a bank statement or via a website or app when checking the balance of an account, including pending transactions in the total.
* Interpret information from a variety of bills or receipts
Example(s):
Recognising common terms used on bills, including amount due, interest charged, discount and due date by pointing to, selecting, writing or saying the correct term when asked, or by matching terms to definitions.

Indicating the variety of payment options available on a bill, including BPAY, direct debit, phone payments using credit card and online banking, by pointing to, selecting, writing or naming the payment options.

Patterns
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* recognises and applies patterns in everyday contexts MALS-PAT-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-ALG-C-01, MA5-ALG-C-01
Content
Recognise patterns
* Recognise patterns in the environment
Example(s):
Matching, copying or describing patterns in flowers.

Creating a representation of a pedestrian crossing pattern.

Recognising that the beeping at the pedestrian crossing indicates it is safe to cross.
* Match patterns, with or without technology
Example(s):
Matching a repeating pattern of 8 objects, with or without technology.

Matching increasingly complex patterns, using sounds, images, symbols or movements.

Copying a movement pattern to follow a dance routine.
Describe and continue patterns
* Describe a pattern in a variety of contexts
Example(s):
Describing patterns in artworks by Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander artists.

Describing a pattern in a sequence of repeating actions, movements or images.
* Continue patterns, with or without technology
Example(s):
Continuing a musical pattern for 2 beats.

Continuing a tessellating pattern.
* Identify an inconsistency in a pattern
Example(s):
When making a bracelet, recognising that a red bead has been used instead of a blue bead and correcting the error.
* Describe and continue number patterns that increase or decrease
Example(s):
Describing and continuing the pattern for 3, 6, 9, 12 ...; adding 3 each time.

Describing and continuing the pattern for 1, 2, 4, 8 ...; doubling the number each time.

Describing and continuing the pattern 9, 7, 5, 3 ...; subtracting 2 each time.
Copy and create a pattern
* Copy a pattern
Example(s):
Copying the pattern of a place setting to set the table for a meal where one is already available.

Copying a movement pattern to perform a dance.
* Create number patterns
Example(s):
Using concrete materials to create a pattern for even numbers.

Finding number patterns on a hundreds board.
* Apply knowledge of patterns
Example(s):
Determining the number of sticks in a repeated pattern.

Creating a dance routine with repeating movements.

Recognising time
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* demonstrates knowledge of time in everyday contexts MALS-TIM-01
Content
Recognise the language of time
* Recognise that activities occur at different times of the day
Example(s):
When discussing daily activities, pointing to, selecting or matching lunch with midday and breakfast with morning.

Identifying that a person is more likely to wake up at 7:00 am than 3:00 pm by pointing to the time on a clock; matching the time to an image of a person waking up, selecting or naming the time.

Using a visual, written, audio or digital schedule to identify activities that happen in the morning, afternoon and evening.
* Follow instructions to participate in activities
Example(s):
Responding appropriately to: After lunch, wait at the library.

Following the instruction: First write down your idea, then show it to your partner.

Using a visual, written, audio or digital schedule to respond appropriately to: First work, then choose an activity.
* Recognise the language used to describe time
Example(s):
Recognising that the time 2:30 pm can be stated as 'two-thirty' or 'half past 2'.
Use language of time
* Apply informal language of time to different times of day
Example(s):
Describing when an activity will happen such as 'I am going to the library this afternoon'.

Using greetings suitable to the time of day, such as 'Good morning'.
* Identify the order of activities
Example(s):
Sequencing the order of familiar activities using a visual, written, audio or digital schedule.

Identifying activities that happen before or after each other by pointing to indicate order, arranging written or visual representations of events into the correct order, or writing or naming events in order.
* Describe and compare the duration of activities
Example(s):
Comparing the duration of 2 activities from the day.

Interpreting time
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* organises and measures time in everyday contexts MALS-TIM-02
Content
Relate times to personal events
* Identify when an activity will occur
Example(s):
Identifying that the next lesson will begin after the music lesson, using a visual, written, audio or digital schedule.

Identifying that sport is on Thursdays at 2:30 pm by pointing to the day and time, matching the words or using visual representations of the day and time, or naming or writing the day and time.

Understanding what 'The train is coming in 5 minutes' means.
* Recognise what time of day an activity will occur
Example(s):
Discussing morning activities such as 'I have breakfast in the morning' using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words.

Discussing evening activities such as 'I take a shower in the evening' using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words.
* Respond to questions about when familiar activities occur
Example(s):
'What will we be doing before lunch?'

'What is happening this afternoon?'

'Is your birthday tomorrow?'
Organise personal events
* Create a personal schedule
Example(s):
Ordering daily activities according to the time of day.

Listing activities in order of the times they occur such as 4:00 pm afternoon tea; 5:00 pm soccer; 6:30 pm dinner; 7:00 pm homework.
* Identify days, weeks and months to organise personal events
Example(s):
Selecting Monday on a multimodal calendar.

Naming last month and next month.

Locating the date one week from today.
* Associate activities with days, weeks and months
Example(s):
Using a calendar to identify upcoming appointments.

Using a calendar to identify special events such as the King's Birthday, Anzac Day, NAIDOC Week, Harmony Day and Lunar New Year.

Identifying whether an event such as New Year's Eve, school holidays, and summer are days, weeks or months long.
* Communicate dates for events of personal significance
Example(s):
Produce the short date in the form DD/MM/YYYY when signing a document.

Circle the date on a calendar to identify when an activity will occur.

Name the date and month when asked, 'When is your birthday?'.
Manage personal time
* Identify time associated with personal events
Example(s):
Using a printed or digital timetable to identify what time a bus leaves.

Using a visual, written or digital calendar to show that netball is on Saturday at 10:00 am.
* Plan personal time for a range of activities
Example(s):
Using a visual, written or digital calendar to identify when a person's birthday party will take place and schedule time to buy a present beforehand.

Planning travel arrangements to arrive at an appointment on time.

Preparing for an assessment in the 2 weeks leading up to it.
* Use knowledge of time to inform decisions
Example(s):
Deciding to go to the supermarket after a parcel is delivered at 10:00 am.

Selecting the best time to order food so that it is delivered by a specific meal time.

Determining if there is enough time to complete a task in class or if it needs to be done as homework.
Interpret time
* Recognise and deal with time in a range of formats
Example(s):
Recognising the difference in format between analog and digital clocks.
* Relate hour, half hour, quarter to and quarter past to a variety of contexts
Example(s):
Beginning to watch a TV show that starts at 5:30 pm.

Recognising that 12:30 pm is the same as half past 12 on digital and analog clocks by pointing to the time on a clock, matching the written time to visual representations of clocks, or naming or writing the time.
* Identify am and pm
Example(s):
Using the terms am and pm to identify activities that happen in the morning, afternoon and evening.

Setting an alarm clock for 7:00 am.
* Recognise time in a range of formats
Example(s):
Recognising that analog and digital clocks both tell the time.

Recognising analog and digital clocks in the environment.
* Describe the duration of events
Example(s):
Using informal language such as quickly or take your time in response to duration.

Using the terms minutes, hours, days, weeks and years accurately when referencing the duration of events.

Setting a timer for activities.
Estimate and measure time
* Plan a journey, with or without technology
Example(s):
Interpreting a timetable to plan a journey using public transport.

Using a travel app to plan the route you need to take to get to a destination.
* Select appropriate units of time for an activity
Example(s):
Choosing seconds, minutes or hours to time how long it will take a person to complete an activity.

Determining if a preferred leisure activity will last seconds, minutes or hours.
* Estimate time using a range of formats
Example(s):
Estimating the time to be 4:30 pm when it is 4:28 pm on an analog clock.
* Estimate the duration of an activity
Example(s):
Estimating how long it will take to wash a car.

Estimating how long it will take to prepare and cook pancakes for 3 people.
* Calculate the duration of an activity
Example(s):
Calculating how long it will take to get to the cinema, watch a film and get home.

Calculating how long a sporting event lasts.

Length
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* measures and uses length in everyday contexts MALS-LEN-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-LEN-C-01
Content
Recognise features associated with length
* Identify features associated with length
Example(s):
Using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words to identify when someone has long hair or short hair.

Identifying tall and short trees using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words.
* Recognise features associated with length that can be estimated and measured
Example(s):
Naming, recording or describing the length, width and height of a door when determining if something will fit through the door.
Estimate and measure using informal and formal units
* Use informal units to estimate and measure length
Example(s):
Estimating the length of an item by direct comparison with a familiar object.

Measuring the length of a table using pencils, and using the answer to estimate the length of the classroom in pencils.
* Recognise appropriate formal units for measuring length, including their abbreviations
Example(s):
Abbreviations such as centimetres (cm), metres (m) and kilometres (km).

Selecting the correct unit of a room from 8 cm, 8 m or 8 km wide.

Selecting centimetres, metres or kilometres to measure the height of the board.

Identifying what formal unit of measurement to use for the length of a table by pointing to the unit, selecting the unit from a list or recording the measurement using the correct unit.
* Measure and compare length using formal units
Example(s):
Estimating the height of 2 people, then measuring each person and comparing the difference.

Choosing 3 items that measure more than 1 m and 3 items that measure less than 1 m.

Using an online map to measure the distance from school to home and from school to the swimming pool to see which is closer.

Ordering measurements in different units, such as 0.5 m, 150 cm and 2 km, from longest to shortest and shortest to longest.
Estimate and measure length to solve problems
* Compare the length of different objects to solve problems
Example(s):
Comparing the length of 2 tables to determine which table will fit in a space.

Selecting a ladder that is tall enough to get a ball out of a tree.
* Apply length to solve problems
Example(s):
Determining how much fencing is required for a garden.

Determining whether a television will fit into the boot of a car when making a purchase.

Volume, capacity and mass
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* measures and uses volume, capacity and mass in everyday contexts MALS-VOL-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-VOL-C-01, MA5-VOL-C-01
Content
Recognise the features associated with volume, capacity and mass
* Identify the language of volume, capacity and mass
Example(s):
Identifying when a container is full, empty, nearly full or nearly empty, using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words.

Comparing 2 objects and identifying which is heavy or light by pointing, matching the words to visual representations of the objects, or naming or recording which is heavy and which is light.

Using the terms heavier than, lighter than, heaviest and lightest when comparing mass.
* Identify features of an object associated with volume
Example(s):
Using uniform objects and examining how they fill or stack in a small space.
* Identify features of an object associated with capacity
Example(s):
Comparing capacity using containers of various shapes and sizes.
* Identify features of an object associated with mass
Example(s):
Experiencing the difference in weight between objects such as a balloon and a ball.
Estimate and measure volume, capacity and mass using informal and formal units
* Use informal units to estimate and measure volume, capacity and mass
Example(s):
Using units including water, marbles and unit cubes to estimate volume, capacity and mass.

Directly comparing items to estimate mass.
* Recognise appropriate formal units for measuring volume, capacity and mass, including their abbreviations
Example(s):
Abbreviations such as millilitres (mL), litres (L), grams (g), kilograms (kg) and tonnes (t).

Identifying measurements on packaging by pointing to or circling the measurements on the packaging, matching measurements to visual representations of the objects, or naming or recording their measurements.

Using a measuring jug to measure 200 mL of milk, or measuring flour for a recipe, in grams.
* Estimate and measure volume, capacity and mass using formal units
Example(s):
Estimating how many cups (250 mL) will fill a 1 L jug, and measuring and evaluating the estimate.

Using kitchen scales to measure ingredients for a recipe.
* Compare volume and capacity using formal measurements
Example(s):
Using formal units to convert millilitres to litres: 1000 mL = 1 L, 500 mL = 1/2 L, 2000 mL = 2 L.

Selecting containers that hold more than and less than 1 L, using objects, images or digital representations.

Sorting containers according to capacity, from most to least and least to most.
* Compare mass using formal units
Example(s):
Using formal units to convert grams to kilograms: 1000 g = 1 kg, 500 g = 1/2 kg, 2000 g = 2 kg.

Ordering objects according to mass, such as from lightest to heaviest, by pointing to objects in the correct order, ordering objects or visual representations of objects, or naming or recording the order.
Apply knowledge of estimating and measuring volume, capacity and mass to solve problems
* Compare the volume and capacity of different objects to solve problems
Example(s):
Deciding the best item to hold liquid for different purposes, such as to provide drinks for 2 people, or to fill a paddling pool with water.

Selecting the correct container for storing classroom materials.
* Compare the mass of different objects to solve problems
Example(s):
Choosing whether to buy a single piece of fruit or a bag of fruit from the shop if you are carrying the purchase home.
* Apply volume, capacity and mass to solve problems
Example(s):
Using the ingredients for 10 cupcakes, calculate how much is needed to make 20 cupcakes.

Calculating the cost of produce purchased by mass.

Area
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* measures and uses area in everyday contexts MALS-ARE-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-ARE-C-01, MA5-ARE-C-01, MA5-ARE-P-01
Content
Recognise features of an object associated with area
* Identify language of area
Example(s):
Using visual, tactile or digital representations to identify a large area compared with a small area.

Comparing area using the terms larger than and smaller than, using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words.
* Recognise that area is the space taken up by a flat shape or surface
Example(s):
Selecting the amount of wallpaper needed to cover an area of wall.

Identifying the area of different shapes using visual, tactile or digital representations.

Recognising the connection between length and width when finding the area of a square or rectangle, using visual, tactile or digital representations.
Estimate and measure area in informal and formal units
* Use informal units to estimate and calculate area
Example(s):
Estimating the area of a table surface using equal-sized pieces of paper.

Comparing the area of 2 similar shapes by cutting out the shapes and placing one over the other.
* Recognise appropriate formal units for measuring area, including their abbreviations
Example(s):
Abbreviations such as square centimetre (cm2) and square metre (m2).

Selecting cm2 to measure the area of a desk, and m2 to measure the area of a field.
* Use formal units and tools for measuring area
Example(s):
Using a measuring app to measure the area of a poster.

Using a trundle wheel to measure the area of a field.
* Calculate area in everyday contexts
Example(s):
Calculating the area of a wall to inform how much wallpaper is needed.

Calculating the area of a room using length × width.
Apply knowledge of estimating and measuring area to solve problems
* Estimate areas to solve problems
Example(s):
Estimating the area of a pond to determine how much pond liner is needed.

Estimating how much carpet is needed to cover the area of a room.

* Apply knowledge of area to solve problems
Example(s):
Creating a floor plan for a room, including furniture.

Geometry
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* explores 2-dimensional shapes and 3-dimensional objects MALS-GEO-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-GEO-C-01, MA5-GEO-C-01
Content
Recognise the features of 2-dimensional shapes
* Identify properties of 2-dimensional shapes
Example(s):
Identifying how many sides a triangle has using gestures, facial expressions, symbols, matching to sample or words.

Identifying a shape by the number of sides it has by pointing to a visual representation of a shape when a shape is named, matching the number of sides to objects or visual representations, or recording the shape when given a number of sides.
* Recognise 2-dimensional shapes in the environment
Example(s):
Matching a triangle to a road sign.

Identifying shapes and patterns in textiles, such as on quilts and in fabric prints, by matching, describing or recording shapes and patterns.

Describing 2-dimensional shapes in gaming graphics.
* Sort 2-dimensional shapes based on attributes
Example(s):
Sorting shapes into groups with straight sides and curved sides.

Sorting shapes by number of sides or corners.
Recognise features of 3-dimensional objects
* Identify properties of 3-dimensional objects
Example(s):
Describing a ball as being round or curved.

Distinguishing between the sides, edges and corners of an object.
* Recognise 3-dimensional objects in the environment
Example(s):
Matching a cylinder to a tree trunk.

Identifying a brick as being a cuboid by matching the object or visual representation to the word.
* Sort 3-dimensional objects based on attributes
Example(s):
Sorting objects into groups with straight sides, curved sides and corners.

Finding 2 or more everyday objects with a similar attribute such as, 'A cone and a drink bottle have curved sides.'
* Sort 3-dimensional objects based on attributes using formal language
Example(s):
Sorting objects into groups with vertices, faces and edges.

Finding 2 or more everyday objects of similar shape such as, 'A pool noodle and a toilet roll are both cylinders.'
Recognise similarities between 2-dimensional and 3-dimensional space across a range of contexts
* Identify common properties that 2-dimensional shapes share with 3-dimensional objects
Example(s):
Pointing to, looking at or selecting symbols to identify the face of a cube as square.

Sorting shapes and objects that have curved or straight sides.
* Use 2-dimensional shapes to construct a 3-dimensional object
Example(s):
Constructing a house using triangles to make the roof and rectangles for the walls.

Constructing a pyramid from triangles and a square.
Explore 2-dimensional space across a range of contexts
* Use 2-dimensional shapes to solve problems
Example(s):
Creating an artwork from 2-dimensional shapes.

Making a tessellating pattern for tiling a wall, with or without technology.

Completing a puzzle.

Laying out a set of photographs to display on a wall.
Explore 3-dimensional space across a range of contexts
* Manipulate 3-dimensional objects to solve problems
Example(s):
Packing personal items into a backpack.

Selecting the most appropriate box to post items to a friend.

Position
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* demonstrates knowledge of position and direction in everyday contexts MALS-POS-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-LIN-C-01, MA5-LIN-C-01, MA5-LIN-C-02
Content
Recognise the language of position in everyday contexts
* Locate the position of familiar objects
Example(s):
Identifying the position of classroom resources.
* Respond to positional language to follow an instruction
Example(s):
Following instructions to swim in between the safety flags at the beach.

Locating a magazine on the top shelf.
Use the language of position
* Describe the position of 2 objects in relation to each other
Example(s):
The newsagent is next to the chemist.

The book is under the table.
* Describe the position of themselves in relation to their environment
Example(s):
Indicating next to the tree when asked where they are, using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words.

'I'm standing in front of the office.'

'I will wait between the canteen and the basketball court.'
Identify position on maps and plans
* Recognise that objects and features are represented on a map or a plan
Example(s):
Using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words to identify the position of doors and windows on a house plan, with or without technology.

Using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words to identify how landforms and features are represented on a map, with or without technology.
* Locate familiar places on maps
Example(s):
Locating the classroom, toilets and office on a school map.

Locating shops, parks and other landmarks near home using satellite image maps.
* Recognise different cultural representations of maps
Recognise the language of direction
* Recognise the language of direction in everyday contexts
Example(s):
'The shop is on the left.'

Tracking a route on a map while it is being described.
* Respond to directional language to follow an instruction
Example(s):
Following the instruction: 'Walk forwards to the tree then turn left.'

Following directions to get to the fire exit.
Use the language of direction
* Provide directions to get from one location to another
Example(s):
Using directional language to describe how to get from the shop to the bus stop.
Use maps to demonstrate understanding of directions
* Use a map to follow directions between locations
Example(s):
Indicating the direction from the swimming pool to the café on a map.

Using a map to find the route between 2 locations.

Choosing the bus going in the correct direction from a choice of 2 bus stops.

Using an online map to identify north, south, east and west.
* Use a map to approximate a location of a place in relation to another
Example(s):
Locating the position of school on an online map using home as a guide.
* Locate current location on a map
Example(s):
Identifying the current position of a shopping centre on the map.

Representing data
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* recognises and represents data in everyday contexts MALS-DAT-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-DAT-C-01
Content
Recognise data in everyday contexts
* Recognise language used when speaking about data
Example(s):
Identifying a bar chart, using visual, tactile or digital representations.

Distinguishing between a table and a graph by pointing to the correct representation when named, matching the words or labelling visual representations.
* Recognise information from data displays
Example(s):
Observing data shown as a sector graph to display information about favourite sport.

Using a line graph showing the local average temperature for a week.
* Identify data displays from a variety of sources
Example(s):
Searching the internet for the most popular restaurant in a suburb.

Locating a data display to determine if it will rain on a given day.
* Demonstrate understanding of data representation
Example(s):
Identifying the topic of a graph by pointing to, selecting or matching the title.

Identifying information in graphs using features such as the heading or title, labels on axes, range, symbols or icons, the scale and the key.

Analysing data using the terms most, least, more, fewer, same as and equal.

Answering 'How many more?' questions about data.
Collect data
* Select a method to collect data
Example(s):
Creating a questionnaire.

Finding information through research.
* Participate in collecting data
Example(s):
Choosing a topic to collect data on.

Asking one or more questions to collect information for a data display.

Recording participant responses in a tally chart.
Display data
* Sort collected data into groups
Example(s):
Sorting favourite movies by their genres: action, comedy, drama, fantasy, horror, mystery, romance, thriller and western.

Sorting favourite foods by food groups: grains, meat/protein, vegetable, fruit and dairy.
* Display collected data in a variety of formats
Example(s):
Presenting information from a questionnaire as a bar graph.

Displaying one dataset as a picture graph and a sector graph.
* Use appropriate strategies to construct data displays, with or without technology
Example(s):
Using objects to create a bar graph to represent the favourite music of students in the class.

Using technology to create a table to display answers to a questionnaire.
* Apply conventions for displaying data
Example(s):
Creating a graph with a heading and with labels on the axes.

Selecting an appropriate scale for the size of a dataset.

Interpreting data
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* interprets information from data displays MALS-DAT-02
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-DAT-C-02, MA5-DAT-C-01, MA5-DAT-C-02
Content
Identify information from data displays
* Identify information presented in data displays
Example(s):
Collecting data and using a pictograph to identify what is the most popular sport among students in the class.

Using a chart to identify the countries from which people migrated to Australia in 2 different time periods.
* Select data to answer questions
Example(s):
Using categorical data to answer questions.
Draw conclusions from data displays
* Draw conclusions from information in data displays
Example(s):
Using the responses to a questionnaire about favourite sports to plan what to do during leisure time.

Drawing conclusions about future population growth from a graph of historical population data.

Using a chart to calculate the temperature change in a specific environment over a period of time.
* Select and organise the most relevant information to evaluate
Example(s):
Selecting information from reliable sources.

Chance and probability
Outcomes
A student:
* develops understanding and fluency in mathematics through exploring and connecting mathematical concepts, choosing and applying mathematical techniques to solve problems, and communicating their thinking and reasoning coherently and clearly MAO-WM-01
* applies chance and probability to everyday events MALS-PRO-01
Related Stage 4/5 outcomes: MA4-PRO-C-01, MA5-PRO-C-01
Content
Recognise language of chance in everyday contexts
* Identify events that are certain and uncertain
Example(s):
Certainties: having a birthday, the days of the week following an order.

Uncertainties: rain on the weekend, getting a new phone for a birthday.
* Use language of chance to indicate the likelihood of familiar events
Example(s):
'It is likely that I will go shopping on the weekend.'

'It is unlikely that I will go on holiday this afternoon.'
Apply chance in everyday contexts
* Determine the likelihood of an event
Example(s):
Asking if it is going to rain, and using the answer to decide whether to take an umbrella.

Asking when the class will go to the shops.
* Predict the likelihood of a routine event
Example(s):
Predicting the likelihood of having breakfast in the evening.

Predicting the likelihood of going for a swim on the weekend.
* Predict the likelihood of a non-routine event
Example(s):
Locating a local Aboriginal calendar and using this to describe the likelihood of an event taking place in a particular season, for example, the chance of rain on a particular day.

Predicting the result of a science experiment.
* Order events according to their likelihood
Example(s):
Selecting 5 routine and non-routine personal events and order them according to the likelihood of them happening that day.

Identifying 3 events from a narrative and order them according to the likelihood of them happening in real life.
Use chance and probability to reason in everyday contexts
* Apply the element of chance to make decisions about familiar events
Example(s):
Deciding what to wear based on a weather prediction.
* Recognise numerical values assigned to the probability of events occurring in everyday contexts
Example(s):
Recognising there is a 50/50 chance of landing on heads or tails when flipping a coin, using visual, tactile or digital representations.

Selecting unlikely using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words to describe the probability of one in a million.

Identifying that there is 100% chance the sun will rise in the morning, using gestures, facial expressions, symbols or words.
* Conduct experiments to determine the probability of an outcome
Example(s):
Spinning a spinner 20 times and predicting, recording and communicating the results.
* Use knowledge of probability to make a prediction
Example(s):
Using a league table to predict the likelihood of a favourite sports team winning a game.
* Apply knowledge of chance and probability to justify a prediction
Example(s):
When flipping a coin, a person predicts the result will be tails. Is this correct? Why?

Using real objects or a visual representation, predicting which counter will be chosen from a bag with 6 red counters and one green counter, and justifying the prediction.

Assessment
The primary role of assessment is to establish where students are in their learning so that teaching can be differentiated and further learning progress can be monitored over time. It provides information that assists teachers to target their teaching at the point of student need. Assessment is most effective when it is an integral part of teaching and learning programs.
Assessment involves:
* establishing where students are in their learning
* ongoing monitoring
* formative and summative tasks
* providing feedback about student progress.
Common Grade Scale
Stage 1, Stage 2, Stage 3, Stage 4, Stage 5
The common grade scale can be used to report student achievement in both primary and junior secondary years in all NSW schools.
Course performance descriptors
Stage 5 - Year 10
Course performance descriptors provide holistic descriptions of typical achievement at different grade levels in a specific course. They are used to identify and report a student's level of achievement in a Board Developed Course at the end of Stage 5.
Grade A
A student performing at this grade typically:
* demonstrates extensive understanding of the relationships between mathematical concepts
* uses, creates and interchangeably moves between a variety of abstract and concrete representations in familiar and unfamiliar situations
* solves routine problems involving multiple steps consistently in familiar and unfamiliar situations
* uses multiple connections between concepts to solve non-routine problems
* applies deductive reasoning and concise, formal mathematical arguments to prove and justify results in a variety of forms
* uses precise mathematical language consistently and effectively to communicate reasoning, explain solutions and justify results
Grade B
A student performing at this grade typically:
* demonstrates thorough understanding of the relationships between mathematical concepts
* uses, creates and moves between abstract and concrete representations in familiar and unfamiliar situations
* solves routine problems of up to 3 steps in familiar and unfamiliar situations and attempts routine problems of more than 3 steps with some success
* uses some connections between concepts to attempt non-routine problems
* applies formal and informal mathematical reasoning to prove and justify results
* uses appropriate mathematical language effectively to communicate reasoning, explain solutions and justify results
Grade C
A student performing at this grade typically:
* demonstrates sound understanding of the relationships between mathematical concepts
* uses and creates abstract or concrete representations in familiar situations
* solves routine problems of up to 3 steps in familiar situations and attempts routine problems of more than 3 steps
* identifies some connections between concepts when attempting non-routine problems
* uses informal mathematical reasoning to prove or justify results
* uses mathematical language to communicate reasoning and explain solutions
Grade D
A student performing at this grade typically:
* identifies some relationships between mathematical concepts
* uses concrete representations in some familiar situations
* attempts routine problems of up to 3 steps with some success
* uses informal mathematical reasoning
* uses limited mathematical language
Grade E
A student performing at this grade typically:
* recognises some mathematical concepts
* attempts some routine problems with very limited success
* attempts to use informal mathematical reasoning
* uses very limited mathematical language
Assessment of Life Skills outcomes
Stage 4, Stage 5
The syllabus outcomes and content form the basis of learning opportunities for students. Through the collaborative curriculum planning process, teachers select specific Life Skills outcomes which are based on the needs, strengths, goals, interests and prior learning of each student. Students are required to demonstrate achievement of one or more Life Skills outcomes.
Assessment should provide opportunities for students to demonstrate achievement in relation to the selected outcomes. Assessment can occur in a range of situations or environments such as the school and wider community. Evidence of achievement can be based on:
* formative assessment opportunities
* summative assessment opportunities.
There is no requirement for formal assessment of Life Skills outcomes. Stage 6 Life Skills courses do not have external examinations or mandatory projects.
 
Mathematics K-10 (2022)	Page 15 of 253

Mathematics K-10 (2022)	Page 24 of 253

Mathematics K-10 (2022)	Page 253 of 253

