NSW Education Standards Authority

Health and Movement Science 11–12 (2023)
Syllabus Support
curriculum.nsw.edu.au
Generated Dec 2025
Downloaded December 2025
© 2025 NSW Education Standards Authority 
NESA acknowledges Traditional Owners and Custodians of Country throughout NSW, and pays respect to Elders past and present. NESA recognises Aboriginal Peoples’ continuing Cultures and Connections to lands, waters, skies and Community.
The documents on the NSW Education Standards Authority (NESA) website and the NSW Curriculum website contain material prepared by NESA for and on behalf of the Crown in right of the State of New South Wales. The material is protected by Crown copyright. 
These websites hold the only official and up-to-date versions of the documents available on the internet. Any other copies of these documents, or parts of these documents, that may be found elsewhere on the internet might not be current and are not authorised. You cannot rely on copies from any other source. 
All rights are reserved. No part of the material may be: 
    • reproduced in Australia or in any other country by any process, electronic or otherwise, in any material form 
    • transmitted to any other person or stored electronically in any form without the written permission of NESA except as permitted by the Copyright Act 1968 (Cth). 
When you access the material, you agree: 
    • to use the material for research or study, criticism or review, reporting news and parody or satire 
    • to use the material for information purposes only 
    • not to modify the material or any part of the material without the written permission of NESA 
    • to reproduce a single copy for personal bona fide study use only and not to reproduce any major extract or the entire material without the permission of NESA 
    • to include this copyright notice in any copy made 
    • to acknowledge that NESA is the source of the material. 
The documents may include third-party copyright material such as photos, diagrams, quotations, cartoons and artworks. This material is protected by Australian and international copyright laws and may not be reproduced or transmitted in any format without the copyright owner’s permission. Unauthorised reproduction, transmission or commercial use of such copyright material may result in prosecution. 
NESA has made all reasonable attempts to locate the owners of third-party copyright material. NESA invites anyone from whom permission has not been sought to contact the Copyright Officer.
Special arrangements applying to the NSW Curriculum Reform 
As part of the NSW Curriculum Reform process, NESA grants a limited non-exclusive licence to: 
    • teachers employed in NSW government schools and registered non-government schools 
    • representatives from peak school education bodies, such as the NSW Department of Education, Catholic Schools NSW, the Association of Independent Schools of NSW and TAFE NSW
    • parents of children registered for home schooling 
to use, modify and adapt the NSW syllabuses for non-commercial educational use only. The adaptation must not have the effect of bringing NESA into disrepute. 
Note: The above arrangements do not apply to private/home tutoring companies, professional learning service providers, publishers, and other organisations.
For more information on the above or for commercial use or any other purpose, please contact the Copyright Officer for permission. 
Email: copyright@nesa.nsw.edu.au
Table of contents
Table of contents	4
Health and Movement Science 11–12 (2023)	5
Teaching advice for Stage 6	5
Teaching advice for Health for individuals and communities	5
Teaching advice for The body and mind in motion	9
Teaching advice for Collaborative Investigation	11
Teaching advice for Health in an Australian and global context	12
Teaching advice for Training for improved performance	14
Glossary	17
Health and Movement Science 11–12 (2023) Terms	17
Global Terms	23

Health and Movement Science 11–12 (2023)
Teaching advice for Stage 6
Teaching advice for Health for individuals and communities
Content
    § Health for individuals and communities
Teaching advice
How do we understand and measure Australia’s health?
Students develop an understanding of health and how health is measured in Australia, including the different meanings of health, the dynamic nature of health, the use of epidemiology to explain the health status of Australians, the role of social justice principles in promoting health status and the determinants that influence the health and wellbeing of Australians. Students develop a holistic understanding of how these factors can change and contribute to an individual’s and community’s health status.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 4th content point of: How do we understand and measure Australia’s health?
In relation to the role of social justice principles, students develop an understanding of how participation, equity, access and rights inform both an individual’s health status and the community. This is an opportunity to discuss how social justice principles impact on the health of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander individuals and Communities. The focus on these principles could be on promotion of health.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 5th content point of: How do we understand and measure Australia’s health?
In relation to the range of determinants that influence the health and wellbeing of Australians, students  develop an understanding of different biological, sociocultural and environmental factors and may be able to provide relevant examples of each to explain how they contribute to variations in health status. Some examples could include:
    • Biomedical factors: genetics, blood pressure, blood glucose levels, cholesterol levels, physical impairment etc.
    • Socioeconomic factors: socioeconomic status, educational attainment, employment status, cultural background, disability, social networks, social expectations and attitudes, cultural traditions, media etc.
    • Environmental factors: geographic location, quality of air and water, safe workplaces, community safety, access to physical resources within a community
    • Broad features of society: culture, affluence, social cohesion, social inclusion, political structures, media and language
    • Health behaviours: individual beliefs and actions
What are young people’s meanings of health?
Students develop an understanding of the meaning of health for young people, including how it has changed between generations and the determinants that influence a young person’s meaning of health. Students have the opportunity to undertake an investigation and focus on developing their research, analysis and communication skills.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 2nd content point of: What are young people’s meanings of health?
Teachers could refer to the general teaching advice provided on how to conduct a research task/investigation.
What key issues affect the health of young people and how can they produce and promote good health?
Students develop an understanding of the health status of young people, including health issues specific to young people, the skills required by young people to protect and enhance their health and wellbeing and how they can improve their own personal health and health behaviours.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 1st content point of: What key issues affect the health of young people and how can they produce and promote good health?
In relation to identifying the trends in key health issues, students may be taught what constitutes accurate and reliable data. It is also important that students are encouraged to use data beyond Australia’s Health to develop a more holistic understanding of the health status of young people.
In relation to examining the health status of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people, teachers could:
    • examine the connection between health and connection to Country
    • explore causes and protective factors related to the health of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people
    • investigate the impact of access to health services in rural and remote areas including Aboriginal Medical Services.
What are the opportunities for improving and promoting young people’s health?
Students develop an understanding of health advocacy and health promotion, including a focus on young people advocating for their own and other’s health, organisations and communities advocating for the health of young people, the nature of health promotion in Australia, and how the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) are being used to improve health. Students develop an understanding of how health promotion has and continues to be used to improve Australia’s health.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 1st content point of: What are the opportunities for improving and promoting young people’s health?
In relation to how young people advocate for their own and others’ health, students could be encouraged to develop an understanding of services within their local community and more broadly within NSW and Australia. Examples of advocacy can be found through Young Australian/Young Citizen awards and through larger actions such as governmental ‘youth voice’ initiatives.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 2nd content point of: What are the opportunities for improving and promoting young people’s health?
In relation to the role government and non-government organisations and communities have in promoting the health of young people, students develop an understanding of different government organisations and non-government organisations that promote the health of young people including Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples. This could include, but is not limited to:
The Office of the Advocate for Children and Young People:  government independent statutory office that reports to the NSW Parliament.
National Aboriginal Community Controlled Health Organisation (NACCHO): NACCHO represents Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander health and wellbeing issues. NACCHO addresses the need for Community to be involved and in control of the health of young people.
Children and Young People with Disability Australia (CYDA): A community-based not-for-profit context that provides links between children and young people with disabilities (as well as their families) and the federal government.
In relation to the impact of organisations and communities on the health of young people, particularly in relation to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander young people, students develop an understanding around how health care should be culturally competent for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander People. Areas for consideration are policy, advocacy, programs, projects and community awareness events such as free health checks held during NAIDOC week. Students may develop an understanding of services within their local community for example Yerin Eleanor Duncan Aboriginal Health Services on Darkinjung Country.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 3rd content point of: What are the opportunities for improving and promoting young people’s health?
In relation to how various approaches to health have influenced health promotion, students develop an understanding of a range of approaches to health with a focus on their influence on health promotion over time. Students will benefit from having a broad understanding of what health promotion is prior to exploring the various approaches.
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander approaches to health include:
    • a holistic attitude
    • community-based practices
    • practising culture
    • cultural healers
    • historical determinants: Connection to Country, Connection to spirit, spirituality and ancestors
    • political determinants: Connection to body, Connection to mind and emotions
    • social determinants: Connection to family and Kinship, Connection to Community, Connection to Culture.
In relation to how the Ottawa Charter has been used to improve Australia’s health, students have the opportunity to develop an understanding of the Ottawa Charter (1986), how it has been used to improve Australia’s health and its historical significance as a template for health promotion. The Ottawa Charter was the catalyst for a shift away from health being the responsibility of the individual to a more holistic approach. The principles centred in the Charter have been leveraged by other international health promotion meetings to expand the Charter’s key message and other health promotion themes. These strategies are the priorities that empower people to increase control over their health while ensuring a people-centered health system. The Ottawa Charter will remain a significant concept for students to understand.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 4th content point of: What are the opportunities for improving and promoting young people’s health?
In relation to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs), students develop their understanding of how the SDGs can improve the health status of individuals, communities and countries. Students recognise that shared responsibility and global partnerships are needed to improve health and address health inequities.
The Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) for the 2030 agenda are a set of objectives within a universal agreement across the member countries of the United Nations (UN) to end poverty, protect all that makes the planet habitable, and ensure that all people enjoy peace and prosperity, now and in the future. Although the goals are supported by targets and indicators, the key learning is that all the goals are interconnected.
Teaching advice documents
    • Teaching advice (Depth studies): Health and Movement Science 11–12
    • Teaching advice: Health and Movement Science 11–12
Teaching advice for The body and mind in motion
Content
    § The body and mind in motion
Teaching advice
How do the systems of the body influence and respond to movement?
Students develop an understanding of the interrelationship between body systems and how they support movement, including the skeletal, muscular, respiratory, circulatory, digestive, endocrine and nervous systems. This includes understanding the interrelationship between biomechanical principles, skeletal and muscular systems and the role first aid plays in response to movement.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 2nd content point of: How do the systems of the body influence and respond to movement?
Biomechanical principles should not be taught in isolation; the interrelationships could be studied through sport-specific applications of biomechanics and the impact on the body.
In relation to how biomechanical principles can be used to enhance safe movements, students may have the opportunity to develop a holistic approach, exploring the structure and function of the body along with biomechanical principles across a range of sports. Where possible, practical application could be used to assist students to develop a deeper understanding of the biomechanical principles.
Areas of exploration could include:
    • considering the anatomy of the knee joint to understand how correct squatting technique can enhance an athlete’s safety, reduce injury and increase movement efficiency
    • considering how repetitive movements with incorrect technique leads to overuse injury
    • considering the anatomy of the spine to understand the importance of safe lifting techniques to reduce the occurrence of indirect injury.
Students have the opportunity to develop an understanding of a range of applications of biomechanical principles to increase movement efficiency. Consideration may be taken to focus on reducing injury through movement and supporting people with specific needs such as disability. Areas for exploration could include:
    • wheelchair biomechanics
    • running blades
    • biomechanical analysis in fast bowling.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 7th content point of: How do the systems of the body influence and respond to movement?
In relation to the role first aid plays in response to movement, students have the opportunity to study a range of examples that connect with systems of the body. Consideration may be taken to the biomechanics of a movement, health conditions, age of an individual. Areas for exploration could include:
    • inefficient movement and undue stress on the body
    • stress fractures for aerobic athletes due to technique
    • tennis/golf elbow
    • nerve pain
    • arthritis
    • undue stress
    • health conditions such as cardiovascular disease (CVD) and high blood pressure
    • diabetes – obesity, nerve pain in feet, circulation
    • digestive issues – gastrointestinal distress
    • dehydration
    • impact on heart rate and blood pressure.
What factors influence movement and performance?
Students develop an understanding of energy systems of the body, the difference between the aerobic and anaerobic training needs for individual and group sports and the physiological responses to training. Students develop an understanding of the content across a variety of sports and have the opportunity to undertake an investigation through which they focus on developing their research, analysis and communication skills.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 1st content point of: What factors influence movement and performance?
Energy systems should not be looked at in isolation. Students need to be aware of how energy systems interplay in a range of sports, unpacking where each system is most dominant at various times throughout the activity. Students also develop an understanding of the role of nutrition within this interplay and consider the specific macronutrient and micronutrient requirements across a range of sports (anaerobic and aerobic). Students may study the role of the macronutrients and micronutrients in supporting the efficient functioning of energy systems.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 5th content point of: What factors influence movement and performance?
Teachers could refer to the general teaching advice provide on how to conduct a research task/investigation.
How are movement skills acquired, developed and improved?
Students develop an understanding of how movement skills are acquired, developed and improved for recreational and elite athletes, including the characteristics of learners, stages of learning/skill acquisitions, characteristics of motor skills, practice methods, performance elements and types of feedback. Students have the opportunity to apply what they have learnt when studying the difference between the recreational and elite athletes of a sport of their choice. Focus could be on available research on acquiring, developing and improving movement skills and develop research questions which can help further their understanding of skill development.
What is the relationship between psychology, movement and performance?
Students develop an understanding of how personal identity, motivation and self-regulation affect an individual’s participation and performance in sport and how communities of exercise motivate individuals and groups to participate in and improve performance, with consideration given to contemporary forms of exercise.
Teaching advice documents
    • Teaching advice (Depth studies): Health and Movement Science 11–12
    • Teaching advice: Health and Movement Science 11–12
Teaching advice for Collaborative Investigation
Content
    § Collaborative Investigation
Teaching advice
The following documents can provide support when teaching this syllabus. For further support refer to the teaching and learning support tab.
Teaching advice documents
    • Teaching advice (Collaborative Investigation): Health and Movement Science 11–12
    • Teaching advice: Health and Movement Science 11–12
Teaching advice for Health in an Australian and global context
Content
    § Health in an Australian and global context
Teaching advice
How healthy are Australians?
Students develop an understanding of the state of health of Australians including the health of specific groups, chronic conditions, how Australia compares to other countries and the impact of a growing and aging population. Students do not need to know the latest statistics on the rates of illness and death. It is only important that they develop an understanding of the trends. Students apply their knowledge of these trends to a range of issues and how this can be used to improve the health of Australians.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 3rd content point of: How healthy are Australians?
Students need to employ their understanding of how health status is determined to draw conclusions based on comparisons between the populations, including but not limited to data on employment, education, life expectancy and infant mortality. Other areas that could be examined in the process of comparing the populations could be equity and access to health and education facilities. They may develop a sufficient understanding of other countries in order to draw a conclusion, for example comparing Australia to New Zealand, Canada, USA and Mexico.
How does Australia’s healthcare system work towards achieving better health for all Australians?
Students develop an understanding of how health care in Australia works, including understanding the role of, access to and funding of healthcare in Australia. Students develop an understanding of the current state of healthcare in Australia and future directions, which may support better health for all Australians.
How is the growing and changing use of technology and data impacting Australia’s healthcare system?
Students develop an understanding of the relationship between technology and health, new technologies and treatments, the impact of digital health and how big data is shaping the health of Australians. Students develop an understanding of the benefits of technology and health and challenges facing Australia’s healthcare system, such as privacy.
What actions are needed to promote and improve the health of Australians?
Students build on their understanding of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) and how the application of these goals can improve the health status of a community.
Students develop an understanding of the SDGs in action, including the understanding that the approach to the SDGs should be holistic. Teachers select and study a specific community and may choose to consult with their students on this selection. The chosen community does not have to be their local community, but may be relevant to students. Students will need to develop an understanding of the data available when researching specific communities (eg the Australian Bureau of Statistics census data by region, local health district data) and how to analyse this data to identify the major health issues for their chosen community.
The focus should not be on identifying key features of each SDG in isolation but the interrelated nature of the features and the goals and how these can inform strategies to improve the health status of the chosen community. It is important that students have the opportunity to study the applications of the identified SDGs in action and develop an understanding of how the strategies can be deemed effective.
Teaching advice documents
    • Teaching advice (Depth studies): Health and Movement Science 11–12
    • Teaching advice: Health and Movement Science 11–12
Teaching advice for Training for improved performance
Content
    § Training for improved performance
Teaching advice
How can exercise assessment and prescription be personalised?
Students develop an understanding of the importance of fitness professionals identifying the needs of their clients through questionnaires and screening, the use of performance/fitness testing and exercise assessment in developing personalised approaches to training.
How does training influence movement and performance?
Students develop an understanding of the importance of the selection of type of training, and training methods and principles of training to physiological adaptations and improved performance. Students are provided with the opportunity to develop an understanding of the application of the principles of training to a broad range of sports, including individual, team and endurance sports.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 3rd content point of: How does training influence movement and performance?
In relation to physiological adaptations, students could be provided the opportunity to make judgements on the role of specific physiological adaptations to improved performance in a variety of different sports. Students could be able to draw correlations between performance in a specific sport and the relevant principles of training and their impact on relevant physiological adaptations.
How does training differ for individual and group sports?
Students develop an understanding of the consideration necessary for the design of a training session and a yearly training program, as well as investigating the use of psychological strategies to improve participation and performance, and discussing the factors that influence how strategies and tactics are used. Students could be provided with an opportunity to explore these across individual and group sports and develop an understanding of the variations required to cater for the different needs and natures of various sports.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 2nd content point of: How does training differ for individual and group sports?
In relation to a yearly training program, students may develop an understanding of the importance of a yearly training program through the exploration of an individual and group sport. For example, comparing a rugby league training plan to a tennis training plan will demonstrate the challenges and different needs of each type of athlete. The chosen sports for comparison ensure that students develop an understanding of how phases of competition change with the nature of different competitions and the importance of all phases in ensuring players are prepared to perform at a range of times throughout the year.
What impact does sleep, nutrition and supplementation have on movement and performance?
Students develop an understanding of the interconnected nature of sleep, nutrition and hydration rather than addressing each element in isolation. Connections are drawn to the nutritional requirements for the energy systems covered in Year 11. To gain a full understanding of sleep, nutrition and supplementation on movement and performance, they could study a range of different sport applications and age groups, such as the ultramarathon swim for individuals, multiday sports events, the Olympic Games and the World Cup for team sports.
How do individuals train for sustained movement and performance?
Students develop an understanding of a number of factors influencing sustained movement and performance. This includes biomechanics, recovery strategies, technology, management and prevention of sports injuries, and drug use in injury management and improving performance. Students learn strategies and tools used to support sustained movement and performance and make judgements on the role they play in different sports and situations.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 1st content point of: How do individuals train for sustained movement and performance?
In relation to biomechanics, teachers can use a range of biomechanical concepts to develop an understanding of this area, including:
    • anatomical structures
    • muscle size and output
    • force absorption and application: measurement of these to assess efficiency
    • projectile motion: angle, height, speed of release
    • fluid dynamics: drag/thrust
    • equipment advances.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 2nd content point of: How do individuals train for sustained movement and performance?
In relation to recovery strategies, students develop an understanding of the role and specific examples of these strategies for different sports and different athletes. Specific examples could include:
    • cool-down: stretching
    • hydrotherapy: hot/cold immersion, ice baths
    • relaxation: meditation, breathing exercises.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 3rd content point of: How do individuals train for sustained movement and performance?
In relation to the role of technology, teachers need to ensure that examples selected are still current. Options could include:
    • training innovations: augmented reality (AR) and virtual reality (VR) technologies
    • equipment advances: running shoes, track surfaces and assistive devices (eg light weight wheelchairs, audible balls)
    • recording and monitoring training and performance: sensor-enabled shoes, GPS.
This specific teaching advice relates to the 5th content point of: How do individuals train for sustained movement and performance?
In relation to the impact of drug use on injury management and improving performance, students understand the health implications of specific drugs including those used for pain management and those used to enhance performance. Students are provided with the opportunity to develop an understanding of the requirements and legislations around drug use in sport, such as those prescribed by the World Anti-Doping Agency and Sport Integrity Australia, and consider this when exploring ethical considerations and drug testing. Ethical considerations could consider fairness of competition, safety of athletes and age.
Teaching advice documents
    • Teaching advice (Depth studies): Health and Movement Science 11–12
    • Teaching advice: Health and Movement Science 11–12
Glossary
Health and Movement Science 11–12 (2023) Terms
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander approaches to health
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples’ concept of health is holistic, encompassing physical, social, emotional, mental, cultural and spiritual health and wellbeing. This holistic understanding recognises the interconnectedness of these aspects and is proactive. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples’ approaches to health are based on this holistic understanding, and incorporates connection to Country/Place, Cultural Knowledge, Customary healing Practices and involvement of the whole Community throughout the entire life-course. These approaches are typically customised to local Communities and take into consideration broad issues such as social justice principles.
advocate
The process of arguing in support of a cause or position, or acting on behalf of yourself or another individual, to ensure that your or others’ best interests are taken into account.
aerobic
When referring to exercise, aerobic refers to any physical activity typically performed at a moderate level of intensity for extended periods of time, requiring oxygen to generate energy.
anaerobic
When referring to exercise, anaerobic refers to any physical activity that is performed at a high intensity for a short duration. A limited supply of stored glycogen is used as energy, not requiring oxygen.
augmented
To increase the size, extent or value of something. For example, augmented feedback for a competitor may include receiving auditory or visual stimuli from the coach or spectators that further informs their performance.
ballistic
A high-velocity musculoskeletal movement, such as a tennis serve or boxing punch, requiring reciprocal coordination of agonistic and antagonistic muscles.
big data
Extremely large datasets that may be analysed computationally to reveal patterns, trends and associations.
biomechanical principles
Scientific principles of mechanical physics concerned with describing movement and understanding the forces that cause movement. Understanding biomechanics helps to minimise the risk of injury, reduce rehabilitation time, improve sports performance and promote sport mastery.
biomechanics
The area of study with a focus on how and why we move. By applying the fundamental principles of physics to human movement, biomechanists describe and measure movement, and study the causes of such movement. Biomechanics in sports involves a detailed analysis of sports movements in order to minimise the risk of injury and improve performance.
biomedical model of health
A model of health that focuses on the physical or biological aspects of disease and illness. It is a medical model of care practised by doctors and health professionals and is associated with the diagnosis, cure and treatment of disease.
community
A group of people linked by a common social structure and sense of belonging. This may be based on location, education, gender, interests, cultural background, political or religious beliefs. It may also refer to an online community.
concept
Key ideas that shape practice, e.g. equity, fitness.
culturally and linguistically diverse populations
Australia’s population includes many people who were born overseas, have a parent born overseas or speak a variety of languages. Together, these groups of people are known as culturally and linguistically diverse populations.
determinants of health
The range of health behaviours, personal biomedical factors, environmental factors and socioeconomic factors, as identified by the Australian Institute of Health and Welfare that determine the health status of individuals and populations.
digital health
The electronic management of health information. This includes using technology to collect and share a person’s health information, e.g. a person wearing a device to record how much exercise they do each day, or healthcare providers sharing clinical notes about an individual.
dimensions of health
There are 5 dimensions of health. These include physical, mental, emotional, spiritual and social. These dimensions are interrelated.
ecological model of health
Model based on evidence that no single factor can explain why some people or groups are at higher risk than others. The ecological approach focuses on both individual and social determinants of health.
environmental factors
Factors in the built and natural environments that impact on health, e.g. geographical location, remoteness.
epidemiology
The study of the distribution and determinants of health-related states or events (including disease), and the application of this study to the control of diseases and other health problems.
equity
Resources are allocated in accordance with the needs of individuals and populations with the desired goal of equality of health outcomes.
ethical
Relates to moral principles. Pertaining to what is right and wrong in conduct.
fartlek
Means ‘speed play’ in Swedish. Fartlek training includes periods of fast running intermixed with periods of slower running.
first aid
The initial care of the ill or injured, usually given by someone who is on the scene when a person becomes ill or injured.
fitness
A measure of the body’s ability to function efficiently, effectively and without injury in everyday activities, to pursue recreational activities and to cope with emergency situations.
FITT principle
A framework for developing fitness programs that emphasises the variables – Frequency, Intensity, Type of exercise and Time or duration of exercise.
fluid mechanics
The study of forces and flow within fluids.
force
A push or pull between objects, which may cause one or both objects to change speed, and/or direction of their motion, and/or their shape.
health behaviours
Refers to a person’s beliefs and actions regarding their health and wellbeing. For example, tobacco use, alcohol consumption, physical activity, dietary behaviour.
health lens
A health lens in relation to the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) refers to application of the goals in a way that targets the health outcomes of the community. This includes creating and improving the physical and social environments, and expanding on community resources that enable people to reach their full potential.
health literacy
The ability to selectively access and critically analyse information, navigate community services and resources, and take action to promote personal health and the health of others.
health promotion
The process of enabling people to increase control over, and to improve, their health.
health status
The health of an individual or population measured against an identifiable standard.
High Intensity Interval Training (HIIT)
Training that involves repeated bouts of high-intensity exercise followed by varying periods of complete rest or recovery at lower intensity.
incidence
The number of new cases (of an illness or event, and so on) occurring during a given period.
infant mortality
The number of deaths among children aged under one in a given period, per 1,000 live births in the same period.
interplay
The way in which 2 or more things have an effect on each other.
interrelationship
The way in which 2 or more things or people are connected and affect one another.
life expectancy
Measures how long, on average, a person is expected to live, based on current age and sex-specific death rates. It is often expressed as the number of years a person born today is expected to live.
Medicare
A national, government-funded scheme that subsidises the cost of personal medical services for all Australians and aims to help them afford medical care.
micronutrients
One of the major groups of nutrients needed by the body for energy production, immune function, blood clotting, growth, bone health and fluid balance, among other functions. Also known as vitamins and minerals.
morbidity
The ill health of an individual and levels of ill health in a population or group.
mortality
Number or rate of deaths in a population during a given time period.
older people
In Australia, this includes people aged 65 and over.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
An international organisation that develops policies for a range of social, economic and environmental challenges.
physical fitness
A set of attributes (health and skill components) that enable an individual to be physically active.
plyometric(s)
Exercises in which muscles exert maximum force in short intervals of time, with the goal of increasing power. Plyometric training may involve jumps, hops, bounds and skips.
prevalence
The number or proportion (of cases, instances, and so forth) in a population at a given time. For example, in relation to cancer, refers to the number of people alive who had been diagnosed with cancer in a prescribed period (usually 1, 5, 10 or 26 years).
privacy
The right to be left alone, be free from interference or intrusion, and to have some control over your personal information and how it is accessed, used and shared.
Proprioceptive Neuromuscular Facilitation (PNF)
A form of flexibility training. It involves a phase of pushing away from the direction of stretch against resistance. This is followed by a period of relaxation with gentle reversing of the resistance to push along the line of stretch, increasing the stretch beyond its normal range.
salutogenic model of health
An approach to human health that examines the factors contributing to the promotion and maintenance of physical and mental wellbeing rather than disease, with particular emphasis on the coping mechanisms of individuals that help preserve health despite stressful conditions.
self-efficacy
Belief in one’s own ability to manage behaviour, emotions and motivations.
social justice principles
Principles aimed at decreasing or eliminating inequity; promoting inclusiveness of diversity; and establishing environments that are supportive of all people. The principles include: participation, equity, access and rights.
sociocultural model of health
This model of health attempts to address the broader influences on health (social, cultural, environmental and economic factors) rather than disease and injury. The focus is on policies, education and health promotion.
sociological causes
Societal influences or reasons. These include social relationships, social interaction and culture of everyday life.
sport
The term sport is broadened to include physical activity as well as organised and high-performance sport, reflecting ever-increasing opportunities for Australians to engage in physical activity throughout life.
Sprint Interval Training (SIT)
A form of high-intensity training characterised by repeated, brief intermittent bursts of supramaximal intensity exercise, interspersed by periods of active or passive recovery.
stability
Stability skills can be categorised as static skills and dynamic skills. Static stability refers to an object at rest, whereas dynamic stability refers to an object in motion.
strategies
A plan of action developed before beginning a task or activity to successfully achieve a goal or outcome.
Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
A set of 17 global goals developed by the United Nations to be achieved by 2030. The goals are universally applied to all to end poverty, fight inequalities and tackle climate change. They influence strategies that build economic growth and address a range of social needs, including education, health, social protection and job opportunities, while tackling climate change and environmental protection.
TOTAPS
A way of assessing sports injuries in athletes and recreational players before allowing a player to return to the field. TOTAPS stands for Talk, Observe, Touch, Active movement, Passive movement and Skills test.
wellbeing
A sustainable state characterised by predominantly positive feelings, attitudes and relationships. It involves resilience, self-efficacy and a high level of satisfaction with self.
World Health Organization (WHO)
A specialised agency of the United Nations responsible for international public health. It aims to ensure there is universal health coverage, protect people from health emergencies and provide people with better health and wellbeing.
Global Terms
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
Aboriginal Peoples are the first peoples of Australia and are represented by more than 250 language groups, each associated with a particular Country or territory. Torres Strait Islander Peoples are represented by 5 major island groups, and are associated with island territories to the north of Australia’s Cape York which were annexed by Queensland in 1879. 
An Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander person is someone who: 
    • is of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander descent 
    • identifies as an Aboriginal person and/or Torres Strait Islander person, and 
    • is accepted as such by the Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander community(ies) in which they live.
Aboriginal English
A recognised dialect of English which is the first, or home language, of many Aboriginal people. It differs from other dialects of English, such as Standard Australian English, in systematic ways including sounds, grammar, words and their meanings, and language use. Aboriginal English is a powerful vehicle for the expression of Aboriginal identity. Aboriginal English is not a target language study option for NSW Aboriginal Languages syllabuses.
Aboriginal Songline(s)
Texts that describe landscapes and directions of the tracks forged in lands, waters and skies by Creator Spirits during the Dreaming.
accessibility
The extent to which a system, environment or object may be used irrespective of a user’s capabilities or abilities. For example, the use of assistive technologies (AT) to allow people with disability to use computer systems, or the use of icons in place of words to allow young children to use a system.
assistive technology (AT)
A device or system whose primary purpose is to maintain or improve an individual's functioning and independence to facilitate participation and enhance overall wellbeing. This includes technologies specifically designed to meet an individual's needs, eg eye gaze technology, as well as more general technologies that can be used by anyone, eg speech-to-text applications. Assistive technology can also be referred to as inclusive technology.
augmentative and alternative communication (AAC)
An umbrella term that encompasses the communication methods used to supplement or replace speech or writing. AAC can be unaided, such as gestures, body language and sign language, or aided such as pictures, symbols, objects or speech generating devices.
See communication systems
communication forms
The ways people communicate and the communicative behaviours they use. Communication forms can be non-symbolic and/or symbolic. Non-symbolic forms include sounds, gestures, facial expressions and eye movements. Symbolic forms can be aided or non-aided. Aided forms of symbolic communication include objects, symbols, photographs and drawings. Aided forms can be digital. Non-aided forms of symbolic communication include formal gestures; speech; and signs, such as Key Word Sign.
copyright
The protection provided to the creators of original works and makers of sound recordings and films, that offers a legal framework for the control and reproduction or transmission of their literary, dramatic, artistic or musical works.
Country/Place
Country is used to describe a specific area of a nation or clan including physical, linguistic and spiritual features. Aboriginal communities’ cultural associations with their Country may include or relate to languages, cultural practices, knowledge, songs, stories, art, paths, landforms, flora, fauna and minerals. These cultural associations may include custodial relationships with particular landscapes such as land, sea, sky, rivers as well as the intangible places associated with the Dreaming(s). Custodial relationships are extremely important in determining who may have the capacity to authentically speak for their Country. 
Place is a space mapped out by physical or intangible boundaries that individuals or groups of Torres Strait Islander Peoples occupy and regard as their own. It is a space with varying degrees of spirituality.
culture
The customs, habits, beliefs/spirituality, social organisation and ways of life that characterise different groups and communities. Cultural characteristics give a group or individual a sense of who they are and help them make sense of the world in which they live. Culture is a shared system but inherently diverse – there can be individual and group differences within cultures. Everyone has culture – it is a lens through which we see the world.
custodians
In Aboriginal communities, an individual charged with maintaining and passing on particular elements of cultural significance, eg language, stories, songs, rituals and imagery.
See owners
d/Deaf
When referring to deaf people who belong to a linguistic and cultural minority known as the Deaf community, the 'D' may be capitalised in reference to the individual, the group, or the culture in order to accord respect and deference, for example, the Deaf community. When referring simply to audiological status or when cultural affiliation is not known, as in the case of a person with a hearing loss in general, the lowercase 'd', as in 'deaf' is the more common usage.
Deaf
A cultural identity for people with hearing loss who share a common culture and who usually have a shared sign language.
disability
An umbrella term for any or all of the following components: 
    • impairments: challenges in body function or structure
    • activity limitations: difficulties in executing activities
    • participation restrictions: challenges an individual may experience in involvement in life situations. (World Health Organization)
diversity
Differences that exist within a group, for example, age, sex, gender, gender expression, sexuality, ethnicity, ability/disability, body shape and composition, culture, religion/spirituality, learning differences, socioeconomic background, values and experiences.
Dreaming
The Dreaming has different meanings for different Aboriginal groups. The Dreaming can be seen as the embodiment of Aboriginal creation which gives meaning to everything; the essence of Aboriginal beliefs about creation and spiritual and physical existence. It establishes the rules governing relationships between the people, the land and all things for Aboriginal Peoples. The Dreaming is linked to the past, the present and the future. Where appropriate, refer to Aboriginal names for the Dreaming.
Elders
The custodians of knowledge and lore. They are chosen and accepted by their own communities as people who have the permission to disclose cultural knowledge and beliefs. Recognised Elders are highly respected people within Aboriginal communities. Proper consultation with local Aboriginal communities will often direct schools to recognised Elders.
first language(s)
The first language(s) that a person learns to speak.
Indigenous
An internationally recognised term for the first peoples of a land. In NSW the term Aboriginal person/Peoples is preferred.
See Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
Indigenous cultural and intellectual property (ICIP)
Includes, but is not limited to, objects, sites, cultural knowledge, cultural expression and the arts, that have been transmitted or continue to be transmitted through generations as belonging to a particular Indigenous group or Indigenous people as a whole or their territory. 
See intellectual property
intellectual property
Non-material assets such as forms of cultural expression that belong to a particular individual or community. Intellectual property rights refer to the rights that the law grants to individuals for the protection of creative, intellectual, scientific and industrial activity, such as inventions. 
See Indigenous cultural and intellectual property (ICIP), and copyright
Key Word Sign
A communication strategy that incorporates signing with speech. It is used to support language development for people with communication difficulties. Although Key Word Sign uses a simplified form of manual signing, it is different to Auslan, as it is not a signed language.
kinship
A key aspect of Aboriginal cultures and values. It includes the importance of all relationships and of being related to and belonging to the land.
language group
An Aboriginal community identified with a common language, both verbal and nonverbal, and with a particular territory. Used in preference to the term ‘tribe’.
language revival
The process and range of strategies for increasing knowledge and use of a language that is no longer spoken fluently across all generations in the context of language loss or language dispossession caused by colonisation. Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Languages are being revived through community initiatives, linguistic research and school programs. ‘Language revival’ may be used as an overarching term that could also include ‘reclamation’, ‘revitalisation’, ‘renewal’ and ‘reawakening’.
local Aboriginal community
A local Aboriginal community is constituted by those people who are Aboriginal and who reside in the near locality. Aboriginal communities will have a rich and diverse history that has been seriously affected by dispossession and relations, which sees families with spiritual connection to Country residing beside those who have been forced to move from other locations. The notion of locality is complex and multilayered: schools should seek advice from a range of people and/or organisations representing local interests. 
See community(ies)
off-Country
Taking place away from Aboriginal land or Country of origin. 
See Country/Place
on-Country
Taking place on Aboriginal land or Country of origin.
See Country/Place
owners
Each Aboriginal Language is recognised as belonging to a particular geographical area and thus to the people who can claim a connection to that area. Aboriginal community members acquire ownership of their language(s) at birth. Language proficiency is not essential for ownership.
See custodians
protocols
The appropriate ways of behaving, communicating and showing respect for diversity of history and culture. This involves appreciation of the knowledge, standing and status of people within the local Aboriginal community and the school community. Protocols inevitably vary between communities, and between people within a community. In establishing a partnership between schools and Aboriginal communities, it is especially important that protocols are acknowledged and respected.
respect
A term used commonly in NSW Aboriginal communities to refer to the way an individual treats others. Showing respect occurs in many ways, such as waiting to speak, listening and demonstrating understanding, not asking too many direct questions, ensuring that people are not made to feel uncomfortable or uneasy, and generally showing regard for others’ ideas, beliefs and culture.
sign
Hand signs (or hand talk) used to supplement or replace oral language. Signs form part of nonverbal communication for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples and may be used by people who are hearing, or d/Deaf or hard of hearing. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Sign Languages may be used in some areas. Some Sign Languages may be associated with sacred ceremonial practices.
signage
The use of words, graphic designs and/or symbols used to communicate a message, eg information signs, plaques, warning signs, road signs, signs that show direction.
switch
A type of assistive technology that enables people with cognitive and/or physical disability to access a range of devices, including computers and communication devices. Switches can be activated by touch, or triggered without contact, such as through eye gaze, sound or blowing.
See assistive technology (AT)
yarning circle
Yarning circles are an important cultural practice for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples to learn within the collective group. Knowledge and information are shared in harmony and respect with all individuals.

