NSW Education Standards Authority

English EAL/D 11–12 (2024)
Syllabus Support
curriculum.nsw.edu.au
Generated Dec 2025
Downloaded December 2025
© 2025 NSW Education Standards Authority 
NESA acknowledges Traditional Owners and Custodians of Country throughout NSW, and pays respect to Elders past and present. NESA recognises Aboriginal Peoples’ continuing Cultures and Connections to lands, waters, skies and Community.
The documents on the NSW Education Standards Authority (NESA) website and the NSW Curriculum website contain material prepared by NESA for and on behalf of the Crown in right of the State of New South Wales. The material is protected by Crown copyright. 
These websites hold the only official and up-to-date versions of the documents available on the internet. Any other copies of these documents, or parts of these documents, that may be found elsewhere on the internet might not be current and are not authorised. You cannot rely on copies from any other source. 
All rights are reserved. No part of the material may be: 
    • reproduced in Australia or in any other country by any process, electronic or otherwise, in any material form 
    • transmitted to any other person or stored electronically in any form without the written permission of NESA except as permitted by the Copyright Act 1968 (Cth). 
When you access the material, you agree: 
    • to use the material for research or study, criticism or review, reporting news and parody or satire 
    • to use the material for information purposes only 
    • not to modify the material or any part of the material without the written permission of NESA 
    • to reproduce a single copy for personal bona fide study use only and not to reproduce any major extract or the entire material without the permission of NESA 
    • to include this copyright notice in any copy made 
    • to acknowledge that NESA is the source of the material. 
The documents may include third-party copyright material such as photos, diagrams, quotations, cartoons and artworks. This material is protected by Australian and international copyright laws and may not be reproduced or transmitted in any format without the copyright owner’s permission. Unauthorised reproduction, transmission or commercial use of such copyright material may result in prosecution. 
NESA has made all reasonable attempts to locate the owners of third-party copyright material. NESA invites anyone from whom permission has not been sought to contact the Copyright Officer.
Special arrangements applying to the NSW Curriculum Reform 
As part of the NSW Curriculum Reform process, NESA grants a limited non-exclusive licence to: 
    • teachers employed in NSW government schools and registered non-government schools 
    • representatives from peak school education bodies, such as the NSW Department of Education, Catholic Schools NSW, the Association of Independent Schools of NSW and TAFE NSW
    • parents of children registered for home schooling 
to use, modify and adapt the NSW syllabuses for non-commercial educational use only. The adaptation must not have the effect of bringing NESA into disrepute. 
Note: The above arrangements do not apply to private/home tutoring companies, professional learning service providers, publishers, and other organisations.
For more information on the above or for commercial use or any other purpose, please contact the Copyright Officer for permission. 
Email: copyright@nesa.nsw.edu.au
Table of contents
Table of contents	4
English EAL/D 11–12 (2024)	5
Teaching advice for Stage 6	5
Teaching advice for Reading to write: Transition to English EAL/D	5
Teaching advice for Texts and society	6
Teaching advice for Close study of text (Year 11)	7
Teaching advice for Texts and human experiences	8
Teaching advice for Language, identity and culture	9
Teaching advice for Close study of text (Year 12)	10
Teaching advice for Writing	11
Glossary	12
English EAL/D 11–12 (2024) Terms	12
Global Terms	16

English EAL/D 11–12 (2024)
Teaching advice for Stage 6
Teaching advice for Reading to write: Transition to English EAL/D
Content
    § Reading to write: Transition to English EAL/D
Teaching advice
In Reading to write: Transition to English EAL/D, students engage with a variety of short and extended written texts. EAL/D students benefit from studying whole texts, such as short stories, rather than extracts from larger texts. Students should consider the framework for texts authored by Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples to emphasise the strength of Communities that empower voice and celebrate unique aspects of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Histories and Cultures. Students read for enjoyment and appreciation a range of culturally diverse, quality written and spoken texts, including short stories, poems, analytical essays, visual images, multimedia and speeches, and use them as models of writing to experiment with language in their own written texts. Teachers should consider the students’ English language proficiency and differentiate the level of texts accordingly. As the first focus area of Year 11, Reading to write: Transition to English EAL/D enables students to develop knowledge, understanding and skills that have applications across all other focus areas in Stage 6 English EAL/D.
Teaching and learning activities should explicitly model the strategies for effective listening, such as paraphrasing, using contextual information to support understanding. Teachers should also model reading strategies and analysis of texts, making explicit the text structure, language features and stylistic choices of each text. Students can undertake a variety of analytical writings in the form of an essay.
Students expand their vocabulary, develop their knowledge of syntax, and sentence and paragraph structure through engaging with the texts. Students should read a variety of written texts that target specific areas of development in their own writing and have regular opportunities to apply this knowledge in their own written texts.
Teaching advice for Texts and society
Content
    § Texts and society
Teaching advice
The Texts and society focus area enables students to develop skills that are transferable to everyday settings beyond schooling. This focus area can be completed at any time in Year 11 after the completion of Reading to write: Transition to English EAL/D. The intention of this focus area is to provide opportunities for students to engage with a variety of texts that can be found in community, workplace and academic settings. Students should consider the framework for texts authored by Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples to emphasise the strength of Communities that empower voice and celebrate unique aspects of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Histories and Cultures. Teachers should develop teaching and learning activities on texts. Teachers should consider the students’ English language proficiency and differentiate the level of texts accordingly.
Teaching and learning in this focus area should provide opportunities for regular speaking and listening, discussing how the selected texts might influence attitudes, and shape individual and collective values and assumptions.
The selection of texts may include:
Read or listen to community texts, such as:
    • feature articles
    • letters to the editor
    • blogs
    • posters and brochures
    • podcasts.
Read or listen to workplace texts, such as:
    • a cover letter
    • a resume
    • an interview.
Read or listen to academic texts, such as:
    • an essay
    • journal articles.
Teaching advice for Close study of text (Year 11)
Content
    § Close study of text
Teaching advice
Through the Close study of text, students develop their interpretative skills along with their critical and creative writing skills. While the focus of Close study of text is on understanding and interpreting the text, students should also be exposed to active listening activities. Through the study of one substantial literary text, students discuss their personal responses to texts by examining the relationship between content, textual form and language features. Students should consider the framework for texts authored by Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples to emphasise the strength of Communities that empower voice and celebrate unique aspects of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Histories and Cultures. Students focus on the text’s structure, language and content to interpret the text and form a personal response. They should also consider the text and author’s context, and the way it might adhere to or challenge the conventions of its form.
Students develop their personal response through class discussion and critical and creative responses. Teachers should model reading and listening strategies as part of their analysis of the text. Students discuss the distinctive qualities of the text selected and explain the effect of language choices on these qualities. They should annotate their texts and use scaffolds to support their decoding and interpretation of the text.
As part of this focus area, students build on their ability to develop an argument in their analytical writing and support it with close analysis and evidence from the study of the selected literary text. Opportunities for imaginative writing based on genre, theme, events or characters of their text should be programmed towards the end of this focus area.
Teaching advice for Texts and human experiences
Content
    § Texts and human experiences
Teaching advice
In this focus area, students study a text from the HSC English prescriptions to develop their knowledge and understanding of Texts and human experiences. The selected text and a range of other written and spoken texts offer students a way of developing their knowledge about the ways the content, form and language of a text can shape a range of perspectives about human experiences. Students should consider the framework for texts authored by Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples to emphasise the strength of Communities that empower voice and celebrate unique aspects of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Histories and Cultures.
Communicating opinions and arguments about the ways human experiences are represented in texts supports students to make connections between texts and to use evaluative language and metalanguage to express their personal responses. In addition to the prescribed texts, students engage with unfamiliar texts to build their skills of comprehension and analysis. Students read and interpret unfamiliar texts to develop their knowledge and understanding of the content for Texts and human experiences. Students also create written and spoken creatives texts using descriptive and expressive language to represent Texts and human experiences. Imaginative, discursive and persuasive compositions from the focus area Writing strengthens their knowledge and understanding of the way language and structure can shape points of view and ideas about identity and culture.
Teaching advice for Language, identity and culture
Content
    § Language, identity and culture
Teaching advice
Language, identity and culture enables students to explore how they use language to discuss their personal, social and cultural identity, and how language is used to communicate connection and disconnection. Students study a text from the HSC English prescriptions and a range of other textual material to explore, question, negotiate and express their identity together with their own added dimension of influences from diverse cultural contexts. Students should consider the framework for texts authored by Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples to emphasise the strength of Communities that empower voice and celebrate unique aspects of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Histories and Cultures.
The relationship between content and context can inform the way students develop their understanding of the way language can influence individual perception and the perception of others. Students develop sustained arguments about Language, identity and culture supported by the content, form and language of the prescribed text and a range of textual material. Imaginative, discursive and persuasive compositions from the focus area Writing strengthens students’ knowledge and understanding of the way language and structure can shape points of view and ideas about identity and culture.
Teaching advice for Close study of text (Year 12)
Content
    § Close study of text
Teaching advice
Through the Close study of text, students develop their interpretative skills alongside their critical and creative writing skills. While the focus of Close study of text is on understanding and interpreting the text, students should also be exposed to active listening activities. Through the study of one substantial literary text from the HSC English prescriptions, students discuss their personal responses to texts by examining the relationship between content, textual form and language features. Students focus on the text’s structure, language and content to interpret the text and form a personal response. They should also consider the text and author’s context, and the way it might adhere to or challenge the conventions of its form. Students should consider the framework for texts authored by Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples to emphasise the strength of Communities that empower voice and celebrate unique aspects of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Histories and Cultures.
Students develop their personal response through class discussion and critical and creative responses. Teachers should model reading and listening strategies as part of their analysis of the text. Students discuss the distinctive qualities of the text selected and explain the effect of language choices on these qualities. They should annotate their texts and use scaffolds to support their decoding and interpretation of the text.
As part of this focus area, students build on their ability to develop an argument in their analytical writing and support it with close analysis and evidence from the study of the selected print text. Opportunities for imaginative writing based on genre, theme, events or characters of their text would be best placed towards the end of the unit.
Teaching advice for Writing
Content
    § Writing
Teaching advice
Teachers may consider teaching this focus area concurrently so students can incorporate into their writing the essential knowledge and skills from other focus areas. The content in this focus area strengthens the knowledge and skills learnt by providing students with opportunities to read a range of texts in different modes beyond the prescribed text, and to support them to become confident writers. Teaching and learning activities should incorporate a range of texts to model the variation of language according to audience and purpose, and to provide opportunities for analysis of language and form. Works selected should model a range of ways to use language, form and structure to shape meaning in students’ own persuasive, imaginative and discursive texts. Students should consider the framework for texts authored by Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples to emphasise the strength of Communities that empower voice and celebrate unique aspects of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Histories and Cultures.
Regular opportunities for students to participate in guided writing in all forms allows them to develop accuracy and expertise in writing. Student writing tasks should also provide opportunities to develop particular aspects of language including register, tone and figure of speech. Students should have time to develop, edit, polish and publish pieces of writing for particular audiences and purposes. Giving and receiving feedback as part of the writing process is essential practice for all students in Writing.
Writing can be approached in the following ways:
    • Identify distinctive features of a selection of texts connected by medium to practise embedding those features into their own writing.
    • Explore an idea such as human experiences in a focus area, as represented in a variety of texts.
    • Undertake a study of the way different forms, such as persuasive, imaginative and discursive, can address the same concept.
Glossary
English EAL/D 11–12 (2024) Terms
adaptations
A literary work that has been rewritten for presentation in a different medium.
aesthetic
Relating to a sense of beauty or an appreciation of artistic expression.
audience
Readers, listeners or viewers who engage with a text.
compose
Develop and/or produce signed, spoken, written or multimodal texts in print, visual, oral or digital forms.
See create
composer
A noun used to (collectively) describe an author, poet, playwright, director, designer and so on.
conventions
Accepted practices or features that help define textual forms, creative forms, styles and meaning.
create
Develop and/or produce signed, spoken, written or multimodal texts in print, visual, oral or digital forms.
See compose
critical
Involving the assessment of the quality of argument, content, analysis, information or persuasion in oral, visual or written text, to assess the way in which themes, issues or ideas are presented for the audience and purposes intended.
discursive text
Texts whose primary focus is to explore an idea or variety of topics. These texts involve the discussion of an idea(s) or opinion(s) without the direct intention of persuading the reader, listener or viewer to adopt any single point of view.
discursive texts
Texts whose primary focus is to explore an idea or variety of topics. These texts involve the discussion of an idea(s) or opinion(s) without the direct intention of persuading the reader, listener or viewer to adopt any single point of view.
figurative language
Word groups/phrases used differently from the expected or everyday usage to express an idea in a non-literal way for a particular effect.
form
The category into which a text can be classified based on its arrangement, structure and style, e.g. novel, autobiography, essay, sonnet, haiku, documentary.
genre
The categories into which texts are grouped based on similarities in premise, structure and function. The ‘genre’ of a text describes larger recurring patterns of subject matter and textual structures observable between texts, such as typical plots, characters and setting.
‘Genre’ can also describe categories of form and structure in texts.
idiom
A commonly used phrase or expression, usually figurative or non-literal, that has an understood meaning specific to a language or dialect, e.g. over the moon, half asleep, pull your socks up.
irony
A clash between what the words say and what they mean. Irony has 3 forms:
    • rhetorical irony – saying something contrary to what is meant, e.g. 'I had a great time' (I was bored)
    • dramatic irony – stating or doing something unaware of its contrast with the real situation, e.g. where the reader or watcher knows disaster is about to befall a character who says 'I've never been happier'
    • situational irony where events are opposite to expectations.
language
Ways of expressing and receiving images, ideas, feelings and stories using spoken, visual, written, and/or gestural communication strategies.
language forms and features
The symbolic patterns and conventions that shape meaning in texts. These vary according to the particular mode or media of production and can include written, spoken, nonverbal or visual communication of meaning.
medium
Means of communication, such as publishing, broadcasting or the internet.
Singular of media.
mode
A semiotic (meaning-making) resource or process of communication. For example, sounds, music, printed or spoken words, images and gestures.
narrative
An account of events or experiences, which are real or imagined. In English literary theory, narrative includes a story (what is narrated) and a discourse (how it is narrated). Narrative can present as an explicit sequencing of events (type of text) or it can be an implied or inferred component in a text.
perspective
A lens through which the author perceives the world and creates a text, or the lens through which the reader or viewer perceives the world and understands a text. Readers may also temporarily adopt the perspectives of others as a way of understanding texts.
register
The degree of formality or informality of language used for a particular purpose or in a particular social setting.
representation
The way ideas are portrayed and represented in texts, using language devices, forms, features and structures of texts to create specific views about characters, events and ideas. Representation applies to all modes: spoken, written, visual and multimodal.
responding
The activity that occurs when students read, listen to or view texts. It encompasses the personal and intellectual connections a student makes with texts. It also recognises that students and the texts to which they respond reflect social contexts.
speaking
May involve using the voice to convey meaning and communicate with purpose. Some students participate in speaking activities using communication form(s), such as sign language or augmentative and alternative communication devices.
See augmentative and alternative communication (AAC)
style
The way in which the effects of distinctive language forms and features of a text, often including those specific to its medium, combine to generate an overall impression.
Particular style elements may be observed in multiple works by the same author, from the same genre, or written during the same time period or artistic movement.
sustained
When referring to texts, maintaining consistency of style, form, language features, argument and other unifying characteristics across the entire text.
syntax
The specific grammatical arrangement of words and phrases into sentences in order to make meaning.
tone
The attitude or feeling the writer expresses through choice of words and/or literary devices, e.g. solemn, playful, defensive or sinister.
values
These are ideas and beliefs in a text. They may be reflected in characters, through what they do and say; through the setting of the text, reflecting particular social views; and through the narrative voice of the text, perhaps through authorial comment. Values are specific to individuals and groups, and a text may contain a number of conflicting values.
writing
The planning, composition, editing and publishing of texts in print or digital forms. Various methods of transcription may be used, including communication form(s) and systems.
See communication forms
Global Terms
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
Aboriginal Peoples are the first peoples of Australia and are represented by more than 250 language groups, each associated with a particular Country or territory. Torres Strait Islander Peoples are represented by 5 major island groups, and are associated with island territories to the north of Australia’s Cape York which were annexed by Queensland in 1879. 
An Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander person is someone who: 
    • is of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander descent 
    • identifies as an Aboriginal person and/or Torres Strait Islander person, and 
    • is accepted as such by the Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander community(ies) in which they live.
Aboriginal English
A recognised dialect of English which is the first, or home language, of many Aboriginal people. It differs from other dialects of English, such as Standard Australian English, in systematic ways including sounds, grammar, words and their meanings, and language use. Aboriginal English is a powerful vehicle for the expression of Aboriginal identity. Aboriginal English is not a target language study option for NSW Aboriginal Languages syllabuses.
Aboriginal Songline(s)
Texts that describe landscapes and directions of the tracks forged in lands, waters and skies by Creator Spirits during the Dreaming.
accessibility
The extent to which a system, environment or object may be used irrespective of a user’s capabilities or abilities. For example, the use of assistive technologies (AT) to allow people with disability to use computer systems, or the use of icons in place of words to allow young children to use a system.
assistive technology (AT)
A device or system whose primary purpose is to maintain or improve an individual's functioning and independence to facilitate participation and enhance overall wellbeing. This includes technologies specifically designed to meet an individual's needs, eg eye gaze technology, as well as more general technologies that can be used by anyone, eg speech-to-text applications. Assistive technology can also be referred to as inclusive technology.
augmentative and alternative communication (AAC)
An umbrella term that encompasses the communication methods used to supplement or replace speech or writing. AAC can be unaided, such as gestures, body language and sign language, or aided such as pictures, symbols, objects or speech generating devices.
See communication systems
communication forms
The ways people communicate and the communicative behaviours they use. Communication forms can be non-symbolic and/or symbolic. Non-symbolic forms include sounds, gestures, facial expressions and eye movements. Symbolic forms can be aided or non-aided. Aided forms of symbolic communication include objects, symbols, photographs and drawings. Aided forms can be digital. Non-aided forms of symbolic communication include formal gestures; speech; and signs, such as Key Word Sign.
copyright
The protection provided to the creators of original works and makers of sound recordings and films, that offers a legal framework for the control and reproduction or transmission of their literary, dramatic, artistic or musical works.
Country/Place
Country is used to describe a specific area of a nation or clan including physical, linguistic and spiritual features. Aboriginal communities’ cultural associations with their Country may include or relate to languages, cultural practices, knowledge, songs, stories, art, paths, landforms, flora, fauna and minerals. These cultural associations may include custodial relationships with particular landscapes such as land, sea, sky, rivers as well as the intangible places associated with the Dreaming(s). Custodial relationships are extremely important in determining who may have the capacity to authentically speak for their Country. 
Place is a space mapped out by physical or intangible boundaries that individuals or groups of Torres Strait Islander Peoples occupy and regard as their own. It is a space with varying degrees of spirituality.
culture
The customs, habits, beliefs/spirituality, social organisation and ways of life that characterise different groups and communities. Cultural characteristics give a group or individual a sense of who they are and help them make sense of the world in which they live. Culture is a shared system but inherently diverse – there can be individual and group differences within cultures. Everyone has culture – it is a lens through which we see the world.
custodians
In Aboriginal communities, an individual charged with maintaining and passing on particular elements of cultural significance, eg language, stories, songs, rituals and imagery.
See owners
d/Deaf
When referring to deaf people who belong to a linguistic and cultural minority known as the Deaf community, the 'D' may be capitalised in reference to the individual, the group, or the culture in order to accord respect and deference, for example, the Deaf community. When referring simply to audiological status or when cultural affiliation is not known, as in the case of a person with a hearing loss in general, the lowercase 'd', as in 'deaf' is the more common usage.
Deaf
A cultural identity for people with hearing loss who share a common culture and who usually have a shared sign language.
disability
An umbrella term for any or all of the following components: 
    • impairments: challenges in body function or structure
    • activity limitations: difficulties in executing activities
    • participation restrictions: challenges an individual may experience in involvement in life situations. (World Health Organization)
diversity
Differences that exist within a group, for example, age, sex, gender, gender expression, sexuality, ethnicity, ability/disability, body shape and composition, culture, religion/spirituality, learning differences, socioeconomic background, values and experiences.
Dreaming
The Dreaming has different meanings for different Aboriginal groups. The Dreaming can be seen as the embodiment of Aboriginal creation which gives meaning to everything; the essence of Aboriginal beliefs about creation and spiritual and physical existence. It establishes the rules governing relationships between the people, the land and all things for Aboriginal Peoples. The Dreaming is linked to the past, the present and the future. Where appropriate, refer to Aboriginal names for the Dreaming.
Elders
The custodians of knowledge and lore. They are chosen and accepted by their own communities as people who have the permission to disclose cultural knowledge and beliefs. Recognised Elders are highly respected people within Aboriginal communities. Proper consultation with local Aboriginal communities will often direct schools to recognised Elders.
first language(s)
The first language(s) that a person learns to speak.
Indigenous
An internationally recognised term for the first peoples of a land. In NSW the term Aboriginal person/Peoples is preferred.
See Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
Indigenous cultural and intellectual property (ICIP)
Includes, but is not limited to, objects, sites, cultural knowledge, cultural expression and the arts, that have been transmitted or continue to be transmitted through generations as belonging to a particular Indigenous group or Indigenous people as a whole or their territory. 
See intellectual property
intellectual property
Non-material assets such as forms of cultural expression that belong to a particular individual or community. Intellectual property rights refer to the rights that the law grants to individuals for the protection of creative, intellectual, scientific and industrial activity, such as inventions. 
See Indigenous cultural and intellectual property (ICIP), and copyright
Key Word Sign
A communication strategy that incorporates signing with speech. It is used to support language development for people with communication difficulties. Although Key Word Sign uses a simplified form of manual signing, it is different to Auslan, as it is not a signed language.
kinship
A key aspect of Aboriginal cultures and values. It includes the importance of all relationships and of being related to and belonging to the land.
language group
An Aboriginal community identified with a common language, both verbal and nonverbal, and with a particular territory. Used in preference to the term ‘tribe’.
language revival
The process and range of strategies for increasing knowledge and use of a language that is no longer spoken fluently across all generations in the context of language loss or language dispossession caused by colonisation. Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Languages are being revived through community initiatives, linguistic research and school programs. ‘Language revival’ may be used as an overarching term that could also include ‘reclamation’, ‘revitalisation’, ‘renewal’ and ‘reawakening’.
local Aboriginal community
A local Aboriginal community is constituted by those people who are Aboriginal and who reside in the near locality. Aboriginal communities will have a rich and diverse history that has been seriously affected by dispossession and relations, which sees families with spiritual connection to Country residing beside those who have been forced to move from other locations. The notion of locality is complex and multilayered: schools should seek advice from a range of people and/or organisations representing local interests. 
See community(ies)
off-Country
Taking place away from Aboriginal land or Country of origin. 
See Country/Place
on-Country
Taking place on Aboriginal land or Country of origin.
See Country/Place
owners
Each Aboriginal Language is recognised as belonging to a particular geographical area and thus to the people who can claim a connection to that area. Aboriginal community members acquire ownership of their language(s) at birth. Language proficiency is not essential for ownership.
See custodians
protocols
The appropriate ways of behaving, communicating and showing respect for diversity of history and culture. This involves appreciation of the knowledge, standing and status of people within the local Aboriginal community and the school community. Protocols inevitably vary between communities, and between people within a community. In establishing a partnership between schools and Aboriginal communities, it is especially important that protocols are acknowledged and respected.
respect
A term used commonly in NSW Aboriginal communities to refer to the way an individual treats others. Showing respect occurs in many ways, such as waiting to speak, listening and demonstrating understanding, not asking too many direct questions, ensuring that people are not made to feel uncomfortable or uneasy, and generally showing regard for others’ ideas, beliefs and culture.
sign
Hand signs (or hand talk) used to supplement or replace oral language. Signs form part of nonverbal communication for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples and may be used by people who are hearing, or d/Deaf or hard of hearing. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Sign Languages may be used in some areas. Some Sign Languages may be associated with sacred ceremonial practices.
signage
The use of words, graphic designs and/or symbols used to communicate a message, eg information signs, plaques, warning signs, road signs, signs that show direction.
switch
A type of assistive technology that enables people with cognitive and/or physical disability to access a range of devices, including computers and communication devices. Switches can be activated by touch, or triggered without contact, such as through eye gaze, sound or blowing.
See assistive technology (AT)
yarning circle
Yarning circles are an important cultural practice for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples to learn within the collective group. Knowledge and information are shared in harmony and respect with all individuals.

