




Drama




Stage 6
Syllabus










Original published version updated:
November 2000 - Board Bulletin/Offical Notices Vol 9 No 8    (BOS 56/00)
November 2003 - Board Bulletin/Official Notice Vol 12 No 6    (BOS 64/03)
October 2009 - Assessment and Reporting information updated





The Board of Studies owns the copyright on all syllabuses.  Schools may reproduce this syllabus in part or in full for bona fide study or classroom purposes only.  Acknowledgement of the Board of Studies copyright must be included on any reproductions.  Students may copy reasonable portions of the syllabus for the purpose of research or study.  Any other use of this syllabus must be referred to the Copyright Officer, Board of Studies NSW.  Ph: (02) 9367 8111; fax: (02) 9279 1482.

Material on p 5 from Securing Their Future (c) NSW Government 1997.






(c) Board of Studies NSW 2009

Published by
Board of Studies NSW
GPO Box 5300
Sydney NSW 2001
Australia

Tel: (02) 9367 8111

Internet: www.boardofstudies.nsw.edu.au

2009354



Contents


1	The Higher School Certificate Program of Study	4
2	Rationale for Drama in Stage 6 Curriculum	5
3	Learning for Drama Stage 6 Students	6
4	Aim	8
5	Objectives	8
6	Course Structure	9
7	Objectives and Outcomes	10
7.1	Table of Objectives and Outcomes	10
7.2	Key Competencies	13
8	Content: Drama Stage 6 Preliminary and HSC Courses	14
8.1	Content: Drama Stage 6 Preliminary Course	16
8.2	Content: Drama HSC Course	21
9	Course Requirements	27
9.1	Course Requirements	27
9.2	Course Prescriptions	31
10	Post-school Opportunities	32
11	Assessment and Reporting	33
12	Glossary	34



1	The Higher School Certificate Program of Study
The purpose of the Higher School Certificate program of study is to:
•	provide a curriculum structure which encourages students to complete secondary education;
•	foster the intellectual, social and moral development of students, in particular developing their:
-	knowledge, skills, understanding and attitudes in the fields of study they choose
-	capacity to manage their own learning
-	desire to continue learning in formal or informal settings after school
-	capacity to work together with others
-	respect for the cultural diversity of Australian society
•	provide a flexible structure within which students can prepare for:
-	further education and training
-	employment
-	full and active participation as citizens
•	provide formal assessment and certification of students' achievements;
•	provide a context within which schools also have the opportunity to foster students' physical and spiritual development.

2	Rationale for Drama in Stage 6 Curriculum
Drama is an art form that explores the world through enactment. It is a collaborative art form that involves the creative interaction of individuals using a range of artistic skills. Drama is an important means of understanding, constructing, appreciating and communicating social and cultural values; interpreting, valuing and transmitting the past and traditions; exploring, celebrating and challenging the present and imagining the future.
In Drama, students can investigate, shape, and symbolically represent ideas, feelings, attitudes, beliefs and their consequences. By studying this major art form students acquire skills in interpretation, communication, performance and critical analysis and become aware of the technical processes and technologies that may be used to heighten dramatic presentation. In the critical study of drama and theatre students can recognise the collaborative contribution of actors, directors, playwrights, designers and technicians to production. They develop an understanding of the cultural traditions and social contexts of drama and theatre.
In Drama, meaning is negotiated and created between the participants themselves and between the participants and audience. Direct engagement with an audience is an essential skill in dramatic performance.
Drama can be employed as a technique for exploring personal and community issues and developing social skills. It caters for a broad range of students from varying social and cultural backgrounds. It allows for the exploration of attitudes and values of many groups in Australian society as students make, perform and critically study aspects of drama and theatre in Australian and other societies and cultures.
The study of Drama will develop the talents and capacities of all students - physical, emotional, intellectual, social, spiritual, creative and expressive - as well as developing self-confidence and self-esteem.
This syllabus provides opportunities for students to develop a range of skills and the opportunity to concentrate on areas of personal interest. It is designed for students who have completed the Drama Years 7-10 Elective course and for those who are studying Drama for the first time.
The skills and knowledge acquired through the study of this syllabus may be further developed and employed in a variety of professions including, but not confined to, theatre, media, communications and community cultural development. The syllabus provides continuity with many tertiary and industry courses.


3	Learning for Drama Stage 6 Students

Drama is located in the K-12 continuum in the Creative Arts K-6 syllabus, Drama Years 7-10 Elective course and the Drama course in Years 11 and 12.
The Creative Arts K-6 syllabus includes Drama for Stages 1-3. In Drama, students make, perform and appreciate their own drama and that of others. In making and performing, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills about contexts and forms. The contexts are:
•	Situation
•	Role
•	Elements of Drama
•	Performance 
•	Elements of Theatre. 
The forms are:
•	Improvisation
•	Narrative Forms
•	Movement and Mime
•	Scripted Drama.
In Drama Years 7-10 students engage in an integrated study of:
•	the elements of drama
•	through the practices of making, performing and appreciation 
•	within the context of a range of dramatic forms, performance styles and their dramatic techniques and theatrical conventions.
Students studying Drama for the HSC bring a variety of prior learning experiences with them. Not all students will have studied the Drama Years 7-10 Elective course. There is a developmental progression from that course to the Drama Stage 6 syllabus and the outcomes of the Drama Stage 6 syllabus represent a higher level of achievement. 

4	Aim
This syllabus is designed for students to experience, understand, enjoy and value drama as a social, collaborative and creative art form and as an expression of culture through making, performing and critically studying drama and theatre.

5	Objectives
Students will develop:
knowledge and understanding about, and skills in, making
•	drama through participation in a variety of dramatic and theatrical forms
•	drama and theatre using a variety of dramatic elements, theatrical techniques and conventions
values and attitudes about
•	the collaborative nature of drama and theatre
knowledge and understanding about, and skills in, performing
•	using the elements of drama and theatre in performance
•	in improvised and playbuilt theatre, and scripted drama
values and attitudes about
•	the diversity of the art of dramatic and theatrical performance
knowledge and understanding about, and skills in, critically studying
•	the place and function of drama and theatre in communities and societies, past and present
•	a variety of forms and styles used in drama and theatre
values and attitudes about
•	drama and the theatre as a community activity, a profession and an industry.

6	Course Structure
Preliminary course (120 indicative hours)
Improvisation, Playbuilding, Actingcommon courseElements of Production in PerformancecontentTheatrical Traditions and Performance Styles
The components in the Preliminary course are interrelated and should be taught in an integrated program of study.

HSC course (120 indicative hours)
Australian Drama and Theatrecore content
one topic from a choice
of two topicsStudies in Drama and Theatreone topic from a choice
of seven topicsGroup Performancecore contentIndividual Project

Either	Or	Or	Or	Or
Critical	Design	Performance	Script-	Video
Analysis			writing	Dramaone project to be
chosen




7	Objectives and Outcomes
7.1	Table of Objectives and Outcomes
The Preliminary course outcomes are progressive and are subsumed in the HSC course outcomes.

Making
ObjectivesPreliminary Course OutcomesHSC Course OutcomesThrough Drama, students will develop knowledge and understanding about and skills in:








* using drama, through participation in a variety of dramatic and theatrical forms
* making drama and theatre, using a variety of dramatic and theatrical techniques and conventionsThe student:
P1.1	develops acting skills in order to adopt and sustain a variety of characters and roles
P1.2	explores ideas and situations, expressing them imaginatively in dramatic form
P1.3	demonstrates performance skills appropriate to a variety of styles and media



P1.4	understands, manages and manipulates theatrical elements and elements of production, using them perceptively and creatively
P1.5	understands, demonstrates and records the process of developing and refining ideas and scripts through to performance
P1.6	demonstrates directorial and acting skills to communicate meaning through dramatic actionThe student:
H1.1	uses acting skills to adopt and sustain a variety of characters and roles
H1.2	uses performance skills to interpret and perform scripted and other material
H1.3	uses knowledge and experience of dramatic and theatrical forms, styles and theories to inform and enhance individual and group devised works
H1.4	collaborates effectively to produce a group-devised performance


H1.5	demonstrates directorial skills 



H1.6	records refined group performance work in appropriate form
H1.7	demonstrates skills in using the elements of productionand values and attitudes* about:

* the collaborative nature of drama and theatreP1.7	understands the collaborative nature of drama and theatre and demonstrates the self-discipline needed in the process of collaboration
P1.8	recognises the value of individual contributions to the artistic effectiveness of the wholeH1.8 recognises the value of the contribution of each individual to the artistic effectiveness of productions

H1.9	values innovation and originality in group and individual work
Performing

ObjectivesPreliminary Course OutcomesHSC Course OutcomesThrough Drama, students will develop knowledge and understanding about and skills in:



* using the elements of drama and theatre in performance
* performing in improvised and playbuilt theatre and scripted dramaThe student:
P2.1	understands the dynamics of actor-audience relationship
P2.2	understands the contributions to a production of the playwright, director, dramaturg, designers, front-of-house staff, technical staff and producers
P2.3	demonstrates directorial and acting skills to communicate meaning through dramatic action
P2.4	performs effectively in a variety of styles using a range of appropriate performance techniques, theatrical and design elements and performance spaces
The student:
H2.1	demonstrates effective performance skills
H2.2	uses dramatic and theatrical elements effectively to engage an audience 


H2.3	demonstrates directorial skills for theatre and other mediaand values and attifudes* about:

* the diversity of the art of dramatic and theatrical performanceP2.5	understands and demonstrates the commitment, collaboration and energy required for a production
P2.6	appreciates the variety of styles, structures and techniques that can be used in making and shaping a performanceH2.4	appreciates the dynamics of drama as a performing art


H2.5	appreciates the high level of energy and commitment necessary to develop and present a performance
Critically Studying

ObjectivesPreliminary Course OutcomesHSC Course OutcomesThrough Drama, students will develop knowledge and understanding about and skills in:



* recognising the place and function of drama and theatre in communities and societies, past and present
* critically studying a variety of forms and styles used in drama and theatreThe student:
P3.1	critically appraises and evaluates, both orally and in writing, personal performances and the performances of others

P3.2	understands the variety of influences that have impacted upon drama and theatre performance styles, structures and techniques
P3.3	analyses and synthesises research and experiences of dramatic and theatrical styles, traditions and movementsThe student:
H3.1	critically applies understanding of the cultural, historical and political contexts that have influenced specific drama and theatre practitioners, styles and movements
H3.2	analyses, synthesises and organises knowledge, information and opinion in coherent, informed oral and written responses
H3.3	demonstrates understanding of the actor-audience relationship in various dramatic and theatrical styles and movementsand values and attitudes* about:* drama and theatre as a community activity, a profession and an industryP3.4	appreciates the contribution that drama and theatre make to Australian and other societies by raising awareness and expressing ideas about issues of interestH3.4	appreciates and values drama and theatre as significant cultural expressions of issues and concerns in Australian and other societies
H3.5	appreciates the role of the audience in various dramatic and theatrical styles and movements
* Note:	While values and attitudes outcomes are included in this syllabus, they are not to be assessed in the HSC assessment program.


7.2	Key Competencies
Drama skills and knowledge are frequently developed simultaneously through participation in creative activity, providing a framework for students to develop effective higher-order thinking skills considered essential for further education, work and everyday life. Key competencies are embedded in the Drama syllabus to enhance student learning.
The key competencies of collecting, analysing and organising information and communicating ideas and information reflect core processes of enquiry and are explicit in the objectives and outcomes of the syllabus. The other key competencies are developed through the methodologies of the syllabus and through classroom pedagogy.
Students work as individuals and as members of groups to construct work for the Group Performance and the Individual Project developing the key competencies of planning and organising activities and working with others and in teams.
In the Making, Performing, and Critically Studying practices within the Drama syllabus, student learning involves enquiry, research, analysis, experimentation and reflection contributing to the development of the key competency solving problems.
Students have the opportunity to develop the key competency using technology in the study of new approaches to Drama and Theatre and dramatic forms in the media of film, video, radio and CD-ROM.

8	Content: Drama Stage 6 Preliminary and HSC Courses
In Drama, the practices of Making, Performing, and Critically Studying interrelate. Students learn to engage in a collaborative process in which they explore, shape and symbolically represent imagination, ideas, feelings, attitudes, beliefs and their consequences.
Making
The practice of making in Drama is characterised by learning that involves workshopping concepts, ideas and experiences through enquiry, research, analysis and experimentation. 
Students learn experientially, within and in response to situations where they take on roles. Learning about dramatic meaning will emerge from the making of drama. The processes of making, performing and critically studying drama and theatre are valued, whether or not they lead to theatrical performance. Making in Drama involves students learning through improvising, playbuilding, writing, designing, directing and interpreting existing scripts. Dramatic forms in the media of film, video and radio offer other ways in which students may make drama.
Performing
The practice of performing in Drama is characterised by learning that involves presenting drama and theatre to an audience. 
Students learn how to develop an understanding of the nature of drama and theatre and acquire the skills to perform drama and theatre of their own and to work with the scripted works of others. Students learn how to develop an understanding of the elements of drama and theatre in performance, and the roles of designers, actors, directors, stage managers, theatre administrators, playwrights and others in the production of performances. In performing, meaning is negotiated and created between the participants themselves and between the participants and audience. Consideration of audience is essential to both the making and performing process. 
Critically Studying 
The practice of critically studying in drama and theatre is characterised by learning that involves research, critical analysis, evaluation and reflection. Students learn how to reflect on their own work and the work of others, and extend their cultural, artistic and social understandings.
Critically studying in drama and theatre involves a reflective and analytical response to individual performances, to bodies of work by individual artists, performance groups and theorists, and to historical and cultural movements and performance traditions. Students learn about the cultural, social and historical contexts of drama and theatre; the ideas, concepts, themes and texts on which drama and theatre are based; and the styles and forms that are developed to express or embody them.

Students learn through activities such as reading, thinking, discussing, writing and research in printed and electronic texts; investigative workshops in which practical questions are explored, reflected upon and analysed; and dramatic and theatrical presentations and performances in which work is offered to an audience for response.
Through oral and written responses students learn how to describe, interpret and evaluate material. They learn to analyse theoretical underpinnings and implications, making connections between different works, practices and ideas.
Such critical study applies equally to the work undertaken in the Preliminary course and to the components of the HSC course.

8.1	Content: Drama Stage 6 Preliminary Course
The Preliminary course comprises:
•	Improvisation, Playbuilding and Acting
•	Elements of Production in Performance
•	Theatrical Traditions and Performance Styles.

Improvisation, Playbuilding and Acting
Outcomes
The student:
P1.1	develops acting skills in order to adopt and sustain a variety of characters and roles
P1.2	explores ideas and situations, expressing them imaginatively in dramatic form
P1.3	demonstrates performance skills appropriate to a variety of styles and media
P1.4	understands, manages and manipulates theatrical elements and elements of production, using them perceptively and creatively 
P1.5	understands, demonstrates and records the process of developing and refining ideas and scripts to performance
P1.6	demonstrates directorial and acting skills to communicate meaning through dramatic action
P1.7	understands the collaborative nature of drama and theatre and demonstrates the self-discipline needed in the process of collaboration 
P1.8	recognises the value of individual contributions to the artistic effectiveness of the whole
P2.1	understands the dynamics of actor-audience relationship
P2.2	understands the contributions to a production of the playwright, director, dramaturg, designers, front-of-house staff, technical staff and producers
P2.3	demonstrates directorial and acting skills to communicate meaning through dramatic action
P2.4	performs effectively in a variety of styles using a range of appropriate performance techniques, theatrical and design elements and performance spaces
P2.5	understands and demonstrates the commitment, collaboration and energy required for a production
P2.6	appreciates the variety of styles, structures and techniques that can be used in making and shaping a performance
P3.1	critically appraises and evaluates, both orally and in writing, personal performances and the performances of others 
P3.2	understands the variety of influences that have impacted upon drama and theatre performance styles, structures and techniques.

Content
In the Preliminary course students learn the skills of Improvisation, Playbuilding and Acting.
In Improvisation, students learn how to work spontaneously to create characters and situations, explore ideas and issues, and use, and experiment with, dramatic elements and structures. When working with scripted material, students learn how to use improvisation to develop understanding of issues, themes, characters and dramatic forms and styles.
In Playbuilding, students learn to collaborate in devising original presentations using dramatic elements, structures and performance styles. Students learn how to use acting skills and performance spaces and how to establish an actor-audience relationship appropriate to style and purpose. Students learn to use production elements such as costume, sound and lighting. Playbuilding can lead to students learning to transform work into scripted form using appropriate conventions and directions. 
In Acting, students learn to perform drama and theatre to an audience. Acting can occur in both live performance before an audience and in the media of film and video and pre-recorded radio drama.
Students learn how to use the voice and body, in conjunction with the mind and the imagination, to transform themselves as actor into a fictitious character. In characterisation, whether created by the actor, or interpreted from a script, students learn how to use dramatic elements, analysis of motivations, reactions and relationships, and the ability to sustain a character in performance situations.
Students learn how to record their experiences in logbooks as reflections, critical appraisals of their own work and the work of others, research, analysis, drafts, character profiles, notes, extracts from scripts, reviews and director's notes.

Elements of Production in Performance
Outcomes
The student:
P1.3	demonstrates performance skills appropriate to a variety of styles and media
P1.4	understands, manages and manipulates theatrical elements and elements of production, using them perceptively and creatively 
P1.5	understands, demonstrates and records the process of developing and refining ideas and scripts through to performance
P1.6	demonstrates directorial and acting skills to communicate meaning through dramatic action
P1.7	understands the collaborative nature of drama and theatre and demonstrates the self-discipline needed in the process of collaboration 
P2.1	understands the dynamics of actor-audience relationship
P2.2	understands the contributions to a production of the playwright, director, dramaturg, designers, front-of-house staff, technical staff and producers
P2.3	demonstrates directorial and acting skills to communicate meaning through dramatic action
P2.4	performs effectively in a variety of styles using a range of appropriate performance techniques, theatrical and design elements and performance spaces
P2.5	understands and demonstrates the commitment, collaboration and energy required for a production
P2.6	appreciates the variety of styles, structures and techniques that can be used in making and shaping a performance
P3.1	critically appraises and evaluates, both orally and in writing, personal performances and the performances of others 
P3.2	understands the variety of influences that have impacted upon drama and theatre performance styles, structures and techniques.

Content
Performance uses the elements of production to communicate a scripted or unscripted drama to an audience. 
Students learn about rehearsal scheduling and processes including adapting to different performance spaces and venues when developing original or scripted material for performance. They learn about and use the technical terminology of the stage and theatre.
Students learn about the roles of the director and the designer through practice, research and writing about their experiences. They learn how the elements of production such as set, properties, costume, sound and lighting can enhance their production when transferring from developmental stages to performance. They learn about the roles of stage management and crew, front-of-house organisation and publicity. Practical skills in these roles will be gained from taking on various responsibilities during class performances throughout the course, to develop practical skills which will be supplemented by observation, discussion, research, interviews, prepared talks and written assignments.
As audience members, students learn to observe, comment on and write about directorial and design concepts, acting techniques and audience reactions. They will learn to apply their knowledge and experiences of theatrical styles and forms to analyse the social and cultural contexts of performances and the effectiveness of productions.
Through reading, listening to, viewing and discussing critical reviews and analyses, students learn how to appraise, evaluate and review performances.

Theatrical Traditions and Performance Styles
Outcomes
The student:
P1.3	demonstrates performance skills appropriate to a variety of styles and media
P1.4	understands, manages and manipulates theatrical elements and elements of production, using them perceptively and creatively 
P1.6	demonstrates directorial and acting skills to communicate meaning through dramatic action
P2.4	performs effectively in a variety of styles using a range of appropriate performance techniques, theatrical and design elements and performance spaces
P2.6	appreciates the variety of styles, structures and techniques that can be used in making and shaping a performance
P3.1	critically appraises and evaluates, both orally and in writing, personal performances and the performances of others 
P3.2	understands the variety of influences that have impacted upon drama and theatre performance styles, structures and techniques
P3.3	analyses and synthesises research and experiences of dramatic and theatrical styles, traditions and movements
P3.4	appreciates the contribution that drama and theatre make to Australian and other societies by raising awareness and expressing ideas about issues of interest.
Content
All performance, however old or new, occurs within an historical, social and cultural context. Students learn about the importance of these contexts and develop performance skills through exploring the differences in performance spaces, acting techniques, dramatic structures and theatrical conventions. 
Students learn that key elements of theatrical performance such as the presence of the actor, the use of space, the role of image and sound, the principles of structure and the role of story and narrative have different meanings and significance in different contexts. Learning will encompass a range of cultural perspectives through the material chosen to be studied. 
In studying Theatrical Traditions and Performance Styles, students learn experientially. This occurs through practical workshops using improvisation and playbuilding and a variety of texts, scripts or extracts from scripts. In this work they will use dramatic and theatrical techniques appropriate to the tradition and style. 
Through research, discussion and theatre visits, students learn about the ways in which theatrical traditions and performance styles inform all drama and theatre. 

8.2	Content: Drama HSC Course
The HSC course comprises:
•	Australian Drama and Theatre (Core component)
•	Studies in Drama and Theatre 
•	the Group Performance (Core component)
•	the Individual Project.

Australian Drama and Theatre (Core component) and Studies in Drama and Theatre
Outcomes
The student:
H1.1	uses acting skills to adopt and sustain a variety of characters and roles
H1.2	uses performance skills to interpret and perform scripted and other material
H1.3	uses knowledge and experience of dramatic and theatrical forms, styles and theories to inform and enhance individual and group-devised works
H1.5	demonstrates directorial skills
H1.7	demonstrates skills in using the elements of production
H1.9	values innovation and originality in group and individual work
H2.3	demonstrates directorial skills for theatre and other media
H2.4	appreciates the dynamics of drama as a performing art
H3.1	critically applies understanding of the cultural, historical and political contexts that have influenced specific drama and theatre practitioners, styles and movements
H3.2	analyses, synthesises and organises knowledge, information and opinion in coherent, informed oral and written responses
H3.3	demonstrates understanding of the actor-audience relationship in various dramatic and theatrical styles and movements
H3.4	appreciates and values drama and theatre as significant cultural expressions of issues and concerns in Australian and other societies
H3.5	appreciates the role of the audience in various dramatic and theatrical styles and movements.

Content
In Australian Drama and Theatre and Studies in Drama and Theatre students learn through theoretical study about the themes and issues, the historical, social, cultural and political contexts of particular forms, styles, movements or traditions of theatre, or the work of a specific artist, practitioner, group or company. They learn about dramatic and theatrical structures, forms, styles and conventions and gain practical experience of them through workshops culminating in presentations and performances using relevant acting techniques, characterisation, performance styles and spaces.
Students learn to analyse, interpret and synthesise their research through discussion and debate, and through structuring their opinions in written responses.
In Australian Drama and Theatre students learn about aspects of drama and theatre in Australian societies and cultures, past and present, through study of ONE of two topics. While the topics differ in the period to which they refer, the perspectives through which they are to be approached are similar. The topics will be published separately.
Studies in Drama and Theatre involves students learning about aspects of drama and theatre in societies and cultures, past and present. Productions and works for this topic may be drawn from Australian and non-Australian material. The topics will be published separately. Students are to study ONE of seven topics.

The Group Performance (Core component)
Outcomes
The student:
H1.1	uses acting skills to adopt and sustain a variety of characters and roles
H1.2	uses performance skills to interpret and perform scripted and other material
H1.3	uses knowledge and experience of dramatic and theatrical forms, styles and theories to inform and enhance individual and group-devised works
H1.4	collaborates effectively to produce a group-devised performance
H1.6	records refined group performance work in appropriate form
H1.8	recognises the value of the contribution of each individual to the artistic effectiveness of productions
H1.9	values innovation and originality in the group and individual work 
H2.1	demonstrates effective performance skills
H2.2	uses dramatic and theatrical elements effectively to engage an audience 
H2.3	demonstrates directorial skills for theatre and other media
H2.4	appreciates the dynamics of drama as a performing art
H3.2	analyses, synthesises and organises knowledge, information and opinion in coherent, informed oral and written responses
H3.3	demonstrates understanding of the actor-audience relationship in various dramatic and theatrical styles and movements
H3.5	appreciates the role of the audience in various dramatic and theatrical styles and movements.

Content
Each student learns to collaborate with a group to devise and perform in a piece of original theatre. They learn how to work cooperatively in creating dramatic works, presenting their own opinions confidently and listening to the ideas of others. They develop their Group Performance using a variety of playbuilding techniques and approaches. They learn to structure their work using dramatic elements and theatrical conventions. They learn how to edit and refine their work through rehearsal, evaluation and editing. In their performance they use expressive skills that are appropriate to the chosen style or form. They learn how to realise and sustain a role and how to establish a relationship with the audience.
As a starting point for the Group Performance, students must choose ONE topic from a list of topics or ideas which will be published separately and which may be changed in total or in part every two years.
In order to assist the development of the idea or topic chosen for the Group Performance, students may choose to use materials that may include art works such as paintings, sculptures and photographs; stories such as legends, myths and science fiction; music such as classical, contemporary and indigenous; documents such as reports, autobiographies, oral history, interviews and documentaries. 
Students chart the process of the development of their performance in a logbook. They learn how to reflect upon, record, interpret, synthesise, research, and describe the process undertaken, as well as problems encountered and strategies used to find solutions.
This performance depends on and extends knowledge, skills and experiences gained by students in the Preliminary course, and will be further informed by knowledge and experiences from their studies of Australian Drama and Theatre, and Studies in Drama and Theatre in the HSC course.

The Individual Project
Outcomes
The student:
H1.2	uses performance skills to interpret and perform scripted and other material
H1.3	uses knowledge and experience of dramatic and theatrical forms, styles and theories to inform and enhance individual and group-devised works
H1.5	demonstrates directorial skills
H1.7	demonstrates skills in using the elements of production
H1.9	values innovation and originality in group and individual work
H2.1	demonstrates highly developed performance skills
H2.4	appreciates the dynamics of drama as a performing art
H3.2	analyses, synthesises and organises knowledge, information and opinion in coherent, informed oral and written responses
H3.3	demonstrates understanding of the actor-audience relationship in various dramatic and theatrical styles and movements
H3.5	appreciates the role of the audience in various dramatic and theatrical styles and movements.

Content
In the Individual Project students learn how to initiate and present a project in an area of interest developed during study in the Preliminary course. They use the knowledge, skills and experiences acquired in the Preliminary course to select an area in which to specialise. Students then learn how to develop concepts and use innovation. They learn how to describe their intentions and the approach they intend to take in realising the project. They learn how to use skills appropriate to the area in which they are working, whether it is based on critical reviews of performances, dramaturgy, direction, design, performance, scriptwriting or drama on video. They learn how to manipulate theatrical elements and conventions to achieve their aims.
In preparing their Individual Project, students learn how to plan, evaluate and structure their work into a refined presentation that meets the criteria of each project.
Students chart the process of their project in a logbook. They learn how to reflect upon, record, interpret and synthesise research, edit preliminary sketches or drafts, adapt work to specifications of time or length, and to submit work in a prescribed form.
The Individual Project will take one of the following forms: 
•	Critical Analysis
•	Design
•	Performance
•	Scriptwriting
•	Video Drama.
The content for the Individual Projects in Critical Analysis (Director's Folio) and Design (Set, Costume, Lighting, Publicity) will be based on one of the texts in a separately published list, which may change in total or in part every two years.
Individual Projects will be determined by negotiation between the student and the teacher at the beginning of the HSC course.

9	Course Requirements
9.1	Course Requirements
Preliminary Course
Indicative hours required to complete the course:	120hrs
Exclusions:
-	When preparing programs of study for the Preliminary course, it is important to exclude any topics that will be studied in the HSC Drama course, or any texts that students will be studying in any other HSC subjects (eg English or Languages).
-	While students in the Preliminary course may attend productions of texts that they will be studying in their HSC course, they may not take part in performances of these plays.

HSC Course
Indicative hours required to complete the course:	120hrs
Exclusions:
-	When choosing their Individual Project, students must ensure that they do not choose a topic or text that they are studying in Drama (as part of Australian Drama and Theatre or Studies in Drama and Theatre) or in any other of their HSC courses. For example, they may not use extracts from a text they are studying in English for the Individual Project Performance, or a playwright they are studying in Ancient History for the Individual Project: Critical Analysis (Research). 
-	Teachers should ensure that students do not submit the same project for any other HSC subject.

Course Requirements for the Components of the HSC Course
Australian Drama and Theatre (Core component)
This component and the Group Performance comprise the Core. In Australian Drama and Theatre ONE topic only will be chosen from a choice of TWO.
The two topics will relate to aspects of drama and theatre in Australian societies and cultures, past and present. While topics may differ in the form, style or historical period they will incorporate a specific perspective on Australian Drama and Theatre.
Learning experiences should be both experiential and theoretical, including workshops and presentations, focusing on relevant acting techniques, characterisation, performance styles and spaces, themes, issues and historical and social perspectives relevant to the set topic.
Topics in this section will be published separately and may be changed in part every three years.

Studies in Drama and Theatre
Students will be required to select ONE topic from a choice of SEVEN. This topic will focus on drama and theatre in societies and cultures in the world, including Australia.
Learning experiences should be both experiential and theoretical including workshops and presentations, focusing on relevant acting techniques, characterisation, performance styles and spaces, themes, issues and historical and social perspectives relevant to the set topic.

Group Performance (Core component)
The Group Performance will be a piece of original theatre which:
•	is a complete theatrical statement demonstrating a sense of dramatic shape and structure
•	provides opportunity for each student to demonstrate his or her performance skills
•	is performed by no fewer than three and no more than six students
•	is 8-12 minutes in duration.
The Group Performances and Individual Projects have either time, word length and/or other requirements (see details below). In preparing for the HSC examination, student are to work within these requirements. Performances and projects that are substantially under duration, length or have required items missing may not fully address all or some of the marking criteria. Performances that go significantly over time will be stopped by the examiners, and material that significantly exceeds the stipulated word lengths or other requirements will be disregarded.
The teacher will be required to act as a supervisor and facilitator, using a variety of strategies, including advice, assistance and negotiation. However, at no time should the teacher, or any other adviser, including outside tutors, assume the role of director. Work on the Group Performances should commence at the start of Term 2 of the HSC year.

Logbook for Group Performance
As part of the Group Performance, each student is required to present a logbook of his/her involvement in, and reflections on, the development of the performance. Examiners have the right to consult these to assist them in their deliberations. However, they will not be used as part of the external examination mark.
As a personal record of the students' involvement in the production process, the logbook may be assessed as part of the school assessment mark for the Group Performance. Teachers should date and sign logbooks, but assessment marks and comments should be recorded separately.
The logbook should provide:
•	a record of initial ideas shared
•	a record of research and reading undertaken and how this contributed to the process
•	an ongoing description and analysis of problems encountered and strategies used in finding solutions
•	a record of constructive advice and comments received from audiences such as fellow students, parents and friends, teacher and assessors of works-in-progress
•	comments on aspects of staging, lighting and design, where applicable
•	a record of the final product.

Individual Project
The Individual Projects will be negotiated between the student and the teacher at the beginning of the HSC course. It may be formalised by the writing of a contract that could be retained until the formal certification is completed prior to the examination. 
When choosing their Individual Project, students must ensure that they do not choose a topic or text that they are studying in Drama or in any other of their HSC courses. For example, they may not use extracts from a text being studied in English for the Individual Project Performance or a playwright being studied in Ancient History for the Individual Project: Critical Analysis (Applied Research Report).
Teachers should ensure that students do not submit the same project for any other HSC subject.
The Group Performances and Individual Projects have either time, word length and/or other requirements (see details below). In preparing for the HSC examination, student are to work within these requirements. Performances and projects that are substantially under duration, length or have required items missing may not fully address all or some of the marking criteria. Performances that go significantly over time will be stopped by the examiners, and material that significantly exceeds the stipulated word lengths or other requirements will be disregarded.

Rationale
For each Individual Project students will be required to present a 300-word rationale clearly explaining the intention of the project and the approach that has been taken. 
The rationale is considered a part of the project. While not marked externally, it will be referred to by examiners in the marking process to confirm the intent of the student work. 
For the Individual Projects: Critical Analysis (Director's Folio), Design and Video Drama, the rationale will be an explanation of the directorial concept, which provides a coherent vision of the play or video drama.
In the other project areas, Critical Analysis (Portfolio of Theatre Criticism) and Critical Analysis (Applied Research Report), Performance and Scriptwriting, the rationale will be an explanation of the overall intention of the work. This includes the approach taken and the reasons leading to eventual decisions. 
In the submitted Individual Projects, the rationale should be a separate item (ie not in the logbook). For Individual Project Performance, the rationale must be on the final page of the logbook.
Logbook for Individual Project
The logbook must be submitted with the Individual Project. Examiners may use it for verification, but the logbook will not be used as part of the external examination mark. However, it may be used as part of the school assessment. Teachers should date and sign logbooks, but assessment marks and comments should be recorded separately.
The logbook is a documentation of the process of the Individual Project and should provide:
•	a clear statement of intention, agreed to by the student and the teacher, in the form of a contract
•	the motivations for selecting the project
•	the ideas and approaches used
•	evidence of research and selection of resources
•	support material used, including sketches, clippings, photographs and other sources
•	decisions made and solutions to problems
•	the extent to which original intentions were achieved
•	drafts and redrafts with explanations for any changes in direction evaluations and constructive advice from advisers or audiences
•	personal reflections and evaluations.


The following table summarises the requirements for Individual Projects. It should be read in conjunction with Assessment and Reporting in Drama Stage 6 and the current Drama Stage 6 Course Prescriptions.

Individual ProjectRequirementsCritical Analysis - Director's FolioThis project comprises a folio of work based on one of the texts listed on the current Design/Critical Analysis text list.Critical Analysis - Portfolio of Theatre CriticismThis project comprises four reviews of live theatre performances attended during the HSC course.Critical Analysis - Applied Research ProjectThis project will take the form of a structured report on the results of an investigative research.Design - CostumeThis project includes costume renderings and supporting materials based on one of the texts listed on the current Design/Critical Analysis text list.Design - LightingThis project includes lighting plans and supporting materials based on one of the texts listed on the current Design/Critical Analysis text list.Design - Promotion and ProgramThis project includes the development of a poster, program and promotional materials based on one of the texts listed on the current Design/Critical Analysis text list.Design - SetThis project includes the development of a three-dimensional model, plans and supporting materials based on one of the texts listed on the current Design/Critical Analysis text list.PerformanceThis project involves the development of a solo performance.ScriptwritingThis project involves the development of a script for a complete play for live performance.Video DramaThis project involves the development of a short video drama which is a narrative developed by the student.
9.2	Course Prescriptions
There are prescribed topics and texts required for study in the Drama Stage 6 HSC course. These are published on the Board of Studies website www.boardofstudies.nsw.edu.au. As the prescribed topics and texts are reviewed, the amendments will be published on the Board of Studies website.

10	Post-school Opportunities
The study of Drama Stage 6 provides students with knowledge, understanding and skills that form a valuable foundation for a range of courses at university and other tertiary institutions.
In addition, the study of Drama Stage 6 assists students to prepare for employment and full and active participation as citizens. In particular, there are opportunities for students to gain recognition in vocational education and training. Teachers and students should be aware of these opportunities.
Recognition of Student Achievement in Vocational Education and Training (VET)
Wherever appropriate, the skills and knowledge acquired by students in their study of HSC courses should be recognised by industry and training organisations. Recognition of student achievement means that students who have satisfactorily completed HSC courses will not be required to repeat their learning in courses in TAFE NSW or other Registered Training Organisations (RTOs). 
Registered Training Organisations, such as TAFE NSW, provide industry training and issue qualifications within the Australian Qualifications Framework.
The degree of recognition available to students in each subject is based on the similarity of outcomes between HSC courses and industry training packages endorsed within the Australian Qualifications Framework (AQF). Training packages are documents that link an industry's competency standards to AQF qualifications. More information about industry training packages can be found on the National Training Information Service (NTIS) website (www.ntis.gov.au).
Recognition by TAFE NSW
TAFE NSW conducts courses in a wide range of industry areas, as outlined each year in the TAFE NSW Handbook. Under current arrangements, the recognition available to students of Drama in relevant courses conducted by TAFE is described in the HSC/TAFE Credit Transfer Guide. This guide is produced by the Board of Studies and TAFE NSW and is distributed annually to all schools and colleges. Teachers should refer to this guide and be aware of the recognition available to their students through the study of Drama Stage 6. This information can be found on the TAFE NSW website (www.tafensw.edu.au/mchoice).
Recognition by other Registered Training Organisations
Students may also negotiate recognition into a training package qualification with another Registered Training Organisation. Each student will need to provide the RTO with evidence of satisfactory achievement in Drama Stage 6, so that the degree of recognition available can be determined.

11	Assessment and Reporting
Advice on appropriate assessment practice in relation to the Drama syllabus is contained in Assessment and Reporting in Drama Stage 6. That document provides general advice on assessment in Stage 6 as well as the specific requirements for the Preliminary and HSC courses. The document contains:
* suggested components and weightings for the internal assessment of the Preliminary course
* mandatory components and weightings for the internal assessment of the HSC course 
* the HSC examination specifications, which describe the format of the external HSC examination.

The document and other resources and advice related to assessment in Stage 6 Drama are available on the Board's website at www.boardofstudies.nsw.edu.au/syllabus_hsc


12	Glossary
conventions	common principles of form and/or style shared by performers and audiences, usually by tradition, but sometimes negotiated within the performance
design concepts	the idea or vision of the designer, in consultation with the director, in interpreting the play for performance
design elements	include line, shape, space, colour, mood, atmosphere, visual and aural texture, scale and visual relationships
directorial concept/vision	is based on the director's creative interpretation of the play's text, themes, characters, style, mood, structure and context
elements of drama	include tension, focus, rhythm, space, movement, sound, time, symbol, mood, pace, pause and atmosphere, character/role, actor and audience relationship
elements of production	include direction, dramaturgy, design, technical operation and stage management (see Elements of Production in Performance page 20)
experiential learning	involves students in learning activities that focus on the experience rather than the theory only. For instance, experiential learning in Design will involve students creating a design, working with design rather than just reading about a design
forms	established sets of structural principles (sometimes rules) by which drama and/or theatre is produced and/or critically evaluated. Examples include historical forms such as Ancient Greek theatre, commedia dell'arte, melodrama, farce, or one of the forms of classical Asian theatre, and recent forms such as community and event theatre, contemporary, avant-garde performance, mixed media, or drama on film
improvisation	spontaneous, unscripted (but not necessarily unplanned or unprepared) performance, used either as a rehearsal technique or in live performance
media feature story	an article on a production, or an aspect of a production, published in a newspaper or magazine. It could be based on an interview with the playwright, director, designer(s) or a performer or performer(s) or include quotations from any of these

performance style	refers to elements used in the realisation of a work in performance. Where the work is text-based, the written play-text itself will often imply the adoption of a certain performance style. Thus a text suggestive of a music-hall entertainment implies a music-hall style of presentation. It is also possible for a director to approach a work through a performance style alien to the original text (eg a Kabuki Shakespeare)
rationale	a declaration explaining motivations and making known intentions. In this syllabus the term is used to expand the idea of the artistic idea or concept behind each of the Individual Projects
styles	established aesthetic features of any part of the process of making and performing works of drama and theatre (including styles of writing, directing, design and performance)
text	the set of signs that may be read as producing meaning in any work, not including the contextual meanings that the reader brings. So the text of a novel is the words on the page, the text of a film is the images on the screen together with the soundtrack, and the text of a theatrical performance includes all the elements of production
traditions	commonly held meanings and/or values, or types of practice, in a particular society, considered historically
workshop	the process of action-learning and exploration conducted in class or in the rehearsal room, involving asking theoretical and practical questions and exploring them through the experimental investigation of possible answers


Drama Stage 6 Syllabus


35

