NSW Syllabus
for the Australian
curriculum
English Standard
Stage 6
Syllabus


Original published version updated:
April 2017 - NESA Official Notice 3 April 2017 (NESA 19/17)

(c) 2017 NSW Education Standards Authority (NESA) for and on behalf of the Crown in right of the State of New South Wales.

The NESA website holds the ONLY official and up-to-date versions of these documents available on the internet. ANY other copies of these documents, or parts of these documents, that may be found elsewhere on the internet might not be current and are NOT authorised. You CANNOT rely on copies from any other source.

The documents on this website contain material prepared by NESA for and on behalf of the Crown in right of the State of New South Wales. The material is protected by Crown copyright.

All rights reserved. No part of the Material may be reproduced in Australia or in any other country by any process, electronic or otherwise, in any material form, or transmitted to any other person or stored electronically in any form without the prior written permission of NESA, except as permitted by the Copyright Act 1968.

When you access the material you agree:
* to use the material for information purposes only
* to reproduce a single copy for personal bona fide study use only and not to reproduce any major extract or the entire material without the prior permission of NESA.
* to acknowledge that the material is provided by NESA.
* to include this copyright notice in any copy made
* not to modify the material or any part of the material without the express prior written permission of NESA.
The material may contain third-party copyright materials such as photos, diagrams, quotations, cartoons and artworks. These materials are protected by Australian and international copyright laws and may not be reproduced or transmitted in any format without the copyright owner's specific permission. Unauthorised reproduction, transmission or commercial use of such copyright materials may result in prosecution.

NESA has made all reasonable attempts to locate owners of third-party copyright material and invites anyone from whom permission has not been sought to contact the Copyright Officer.

Phone: (02) 9367 8289
Fax: (02) 9279 1482
Email: copyright@nesa.nsw.edu.au

Published by
NSW Education Standards Authority
GPO Box 5300
Sydney NSW 2001
Australia

www.educationstandards.nsw.edu.au

DSSP-27614
D2016/58127

Contents
Introduction	4
English Standard Key	8
Rationale	10
The Place of the English Standard Stage 6 Syllabus in the K-12 Curriculum	12
Aim	15
Objectives	16
Outcomes	17
Year 11 Course Structure and Requirements	19
Year 12 Course Structure and Requirements	20
Assessment and Reporting	21
Content	22
English Standard Year 11 Course Content	30
English Standard Year 12 Course Content	52
Glossary	75


Introduction
Stage 6 Curriculum
NSW Education Standards Authority (NESA) Stage 6 syllabuses have been developed to provide students with opportunities to further develop skills which will assist in the next stage of their lives.

The purpose of Stage 6 syllabuses is to:
? develop a solid foundation of literacy and numeracy
? provide a curriculum structure which encourages students to complete secondary education at their highest possible level
? foster the intellectual, creative, ethical and social development of students, in particular relating to:
- application of knowledge, skills, understanding, values and attitudes in the fields of study they choose
- capacity to manage their own learning and to become flexible, independent thinkers, problem-solvers and decision-makers
- capacity to work collaboratively with others
- respect for the cultural diversity of Australian society
- desire to continue learning in formal or informal settings after school
? provide a flexible structure within which students can meet the challenges of and prepare for:
- further academic study, vocational training and employment
- changing workplaces, including an increasingly STEM focused (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) workforce
- full and active participation as global citizens
? provide formal assessment and certification of students' achievements
? promote the development of students' values, identity and self-respect.

The Stage 6 syllabuses reflect the principles of the NESA K-10 Curriculum Framework and Statement of Equity Principles, the reforms of the NSW Government Stronger HSC Standards (2016), and nationally agreed educational goals. These syllabuses build on the continuum of learning developed in the K-10 syllabuses.

The syllabuses provide a set of broad learning outcomes that summarise the knowledge, understanding, skills, values and attitudes important for students to succeed in and beyond their schooling. In particular, the attainment of skills in literacy and numeracy needed for further study, employment and active participation in society are provided in the syllabuses in alignment with the Australian Core Skills Framework (ACSF).

The Stage 6 syllabuses include the content of the Australian curriculum and additional descriptions that clarify the scope and depth of learning in each subject.

NESA syllabuses support a standards-referenced approach to assessment by detailing the important knowledge, understanding, skills, values and attitudes students will develop and outlining clear standards of what students are expected to know and be able to do. The syllabuses take into account the diverse needs of all students and provide structures and processes by which teachers can provide continuity of study for all students.


Diversity of Learners
NSW Stage 6 syllabuses are inclusive of the learning needs of all students. Syllabuses accommodate teaching approaches that support student diversity including students with special education needs, gifted and talented students, and students learning English as an additional language or dialect (EAL/D). Students may have more than one learning need.
Students with Special Education Needs
All students are entitled to participate in and progress through the curriculum. Schools are required to provide additional support or adjustments to teaching, learning and assessment activities for some students with special education needs. Adjustments are measures or actions taken in relation to teaching, learning and assessment that enable a student with special education needs to access syllabus outcomes and content, and demonstrate achievement of outcomes.

Students with special education needs can access the outcomes and content from Stage 6 syllabuses in a range of ways. Students may engage with:
? Stage 6 syllabus outcomes and content with adjustments to teaching, learning and/or assessment activities; or
? selected Stage 6 Life Skills outcomes and content from one or more Stage 6 Life Skills syllabuses.

Decisions regarding curriculum options, including adjustments, should be made in the context of collaborative curriculum planning with the student, parent/carer and other significant individuals to ensure that decisions are appropriate for the learning needs and priorities of individual students.

The English Life Skills Stage 6 Syllabus has been developed from the rationale, aim and objectives of the English Stage 6 syllabuses.

Further information can be found in support materials for:
? English Standard
? Special education needs
? Life Skills.
Gifted and Talented Students
Gifted students have specific learning needs that may require adjustments to the pace, level and content of the curriculum. Differentiated educational opportunities assist in meeting the needs of gifted students.

Generally, gifted students demonstrate the following characteristics:
? the capacity to learn at faster rates
? the capacity to find and solve problems
? the capacity to make connections and manipulate abstract ideas.

There are different kinds and levels of giftedness. Gifted and talented students may also possess learning difficulties and/or disabilities that should be addressed when planning appropriate teaching, learning and assessment activities.


Curriculum strategies for gifted and talented students may include:
? differentiation: modifying the pace, level and content of teaching, learning and assessment activities
? acceleration: promoting a student to a level of study beyond their age group
? curriculum compacting: assessing a student's current level of learning and addressing aspects of the curriculum that have not yet been mastered.

School decisions about appropriate strategies are generally collaborative and involve teachers, parents and students with reference to documents and advice available from NESA and the education sectors.

Gifted and talented students may also benefit from individual planning to determine the curriculum options, as well as teaching, learning and assessment strategies, most suited to their needs and abilities.
Students Learning English as an Additional Language or Dialect (EAL/D)
Many students in Australian schools are learning English as an additional language or dialect (EAL/D). EAL/D students are those whose first language is a language or dialect other than Standard Australian English and who require additional support to assist them to develop English language proficiency.

EAL/D students come from diverse backgrounds and may include:
? overseas and Australian-born students whose first language is a language other than English, including creoles and related varieties
? Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander students whose first language is Aboriginal English, including Kriol and related varieties.

EAL/D students enter Australian schools at different ages and stages of schooling and at different stages of English language learning. They have diverse talents and capabilities and a range of prior learning experiences and levels of literacy in their first language and in English. EAL/D students represent a significant and growing percentage of learners in NSW schools. For some, school is the only place they use Standard Australian English.

EAL/D students are simultaneously learning a new language and the knowledge, understanding and skills of the English Standard Stage 6 Syllabus through that new language. They may require additional support, along with informed teaching that explicitly addresses their language needs.


Using the ESL Scales with EAL/D Learners
The ESL scales provide a detailed description of English language progression for EAL/D learners. In the English Standard Stage 6 Syllabus, the subject content has been mapped to the ESL scales to support teachers of EAL/D learners. Teachers should use the ESL scales in conjunction with the syllabus to address the needs of EAL/D students and to assist them to access English curriculum outcomes and content.

The ESL scales provide a description of English language learning progression typical of EAL/D learners. This progression is organised into strands of Oral Interaction, Reading and Responding, and Writing. Each of these strands is organised into level statements. The level statements range from Levels 1 to 7 for Reading and Responding and Writing and from Levels 1 to 8 for Oral Interaction. There are also beginner levels in Reading and Responding and Writing for students who are not literate in any language when they begin learning English.

EAL/D learners may be at any stage in the development of their English language skills and therefore any level on the ESL scales. Teachers can address the needs of EAL/D learners by determining their level of language on the ESL scales and then considering the ESL scales outcomes mapped to the English content.

The ESL scales outcomes mapped to the content have been selected to show the level of English EAL/D learners need in order to achieve the English outcomes. Teachers can use the outcomes and the relevant performance indicators in the ESL scales to plan and program for the language needs of EAL/D students. This should be done in conjunction with development of the knowledge, understanding and skills of the English syllabus content.

EAL/D, English as a Second Language (ESL) and English for Speakers of Other Languages (ESOL) frameworks such as the ESL scales, the English as an Additional Language or Dialect: Teacher Resource and related materials can provide detailed information about the English language development phases of EAL/D students. These resources can be used by teachers in conjunction with the English EAL/D Stage 6 Syllabus to address the specific needs of English language learners in their classes and to assist students to access syllabus outcomes and content.


English Standard Key
The following codes and icons are used in the English Standard Stage 6 Syllabus.
Outcome Coding
Syllabus outcomes have been coded in a consistent way. The code identifies the subject, Year and outcome number. For example:



Outcome codeInterpretationEN11-1English Standard, Year 11 - Outcome number 1EN12-4English Standard, Year 12 - Outcome number 4ENLS6-6English Life Skills, Stage 6 - Outcome number 6Coding of Australian Curriculum Content
Australian curriculum content descriptions included in the syllabus are identified by an Australian curriculum code which appears in brackets at the end of each content description. For example:

Investigate the relationships between language, context and meaning by evaluating the choice of mode and medium in shaping the response of audiences, including digital texts. (ACEEN003)



Where a number of content descriptions are jointly represented, all description codes are included, eg (ACEEN001, ACEEN002, ACEEN003) or (ACELR001, ACELR002, ACELR003).


Learning Across the Curriculum Icons
Learning across the curriculum content, including cross-curriculum priorities, general capabilities and other areas identified as important learning for all students, is incorporated and identified by icons in the syllabus.

Cross-curriculum priorities
 	Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander histories and cultures
 	Asia and Australia's engagement with Asia
 	Sustainability

General capabilities
 	Critical and creative thinking
 	Ethical understanding
 	Information and communication technology capability
 	Intercultural understanding
 	Literacy
 	Numeracy
 	Personal and social capability

Other learning across the curriculum areas
 	Civics and citizenship
 	Difference and diversity
 	Work and enterprise


Rationale
Rationale for English in Stage 6 Curriculum
Language shapes our understanding of ourselves and our world. It is the primary means by which we relate to others and is central to the intellectual, social and emotional development of all students. In the years of schooling from Kindergarten to Year 12, English is the study and use of the English language in its various textual forms. These encompass spoken, written, visual and multimodal texts of varying complexity through which meaning is shaped, conveyed, interpreted and reflected.

In acknowledgement of its role as the national language, English is the mandatory subject from Kindergarten to Year 12 in the NSW curriculum. Knowledge, understanding, skills, values and attitudes acquired in English are central to the learning and development of students. Proficiency in English enables students to take their place as confident communicators, critical and imaginative thinkers, lifelong learners and informed, active participants in Australian society. It supports the development and expression of a system of personal values, based on students' understanding of moral and ethical matters, and gives expression to their aspirations and ideals.

The study of English in Stage 6 develops in students an understanding of literary expression and nurtures an appreciation of aesthetic values. It develops skills to enable students to experiment with ideas and expression, to become innovative, active, independent learners, to collaborate and to reflect on their learning.

Through responding to and composing texts from Kindergarten to Year 12, students learn about the power, value and art of the English language for communication, knowledge, enjoyment and agency. They engage with and explore texts that include widely acknowledged quality literature of past and contemporary societies and engage with the literature and literary heritage of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples. By composing and responding students develop an understanding of themselves and of diverse human experiences and cultures.

The study of English in this syllabus is founded on the belief that language learning is recursive and develops through ever widening contexts. Students learn English through explicit teaching of language and literacy, and through their engagement with a diverse range of purposeful and increasingly demanding textual experiences. The English Stage 6 syllabuses enable teachers to draw on various theoretical perspectives and pedagogical models for teaching English to assist their students to achieve the syllabus outcomes at the highest levels.

In their study of English, students continue to develop their critical and imaginative faculties and broaden their capacity for cultural understanding. They examine various contexts of language usage to understand how making meaning is complex and shaped by a multiplicity of factors. As students' command of English continues to grow, they are provided with opportunities to question, assess, challenge, reformulate information and identify and clarify issues, negotiate and solve problems. They can become creative and confident users of a range of digital technologies and understand and reflect on the ongoing impact of these technologies on society. These skills and understandings allow them to develop their control of language for life-long learning, in their careers and lives in a global world.


Rationale for English Standard
The English Standard course is designed for students to increase their expertise in English to enhance their personal, educational, social and vocational lives. The English Standard course provides students, who have a diverse range of literacy skills, with the opportunity to analyse, study and enjoy a breadth and variety of English texts to become confident and effective communicators. English Standard offers a rich language experience that is reflected through the integrated modes of reading, writing, speaking, listening, viewing and representing.

Students engage with texts that include widely acknowledged quality literature from the past and contemporary texts from Australia and other cultures. They explore language forms, features and structures of texts in a range of academic, personal, social, historical, cultural and workplace contexts. Students study, analyse, respond to and compose texts to extend experience, access information and assess its reliability. They synthesise the knowledge gained from a range of sources to fulfil a variety of purposes. Responding to and composing texts provide students with the opportunity to appreciate the imaginative and the affective domains and to recognise the ways texts convey, interpret, question and reflect opinions and perspectives.

In their study of English students continue to develop their creative and critical faculties and broaden their capacity for cultural understanding. The course provides diverse approaches to texts so that students may become flexible and critical thinkers, capable of appreciating the variety of cultural heritages and differences that make up Australian society. They further develop skills in literacy, and independent, collaborative and reflective learning. Such skills form the basis of sound practices of investigation and analysis required for adult life, including the world of work as well as post-school training and education. The course encourages students to analyse, reconsider and refine meaning and reflect on their own processes of writing, responding, composing and learning.


The Place of the English Standard Stage 6 Syllabus in the K-12 Curriculum



English Life Skills is designed for students with special education needs who are unable to access the outcomes of the Stage 6 English courses even with adjustments to teaching, learning and assessment. It provides an opportunity for students to engage in personalised learning of English through the selection of outcomes and content relevant to the student's abilities, needs and interests. Students undertaking English Life Skills are eligible for the award of the Higher School Certificate.

English Studies is designed for students who wish to refine their skills and knowledge in English and consolidate their English literacy skills to enhance their personal, social, educational and vocational lives. It is a course for students who wish to be awarded a Higher School Certificate but who are seeking an alternative to the English Standard course.

English Standard is designed for all students to increase their expertise in English and consolidate their English literacy skills in order to enhance their personal, social, educational and vocational lives. The students learn to respond to and compose a wide variety of texts in a range of situations in order to be effective, creative and confident communicators.

English Advanced is designed for students to undertake the challenge of higher-order thinking to enhance their personal, social, educational and vocational lives. These students apply critical and creative skills in their composition of and response to texts in order to develop their academic achievement through understanding the nature and function of complex texts.

English EAL/D is designed for students from diverse non-English speaking, Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander backgrounds as designated by the course entry requirements. The students engage in a variety of language learning experiences to develop and consolidate their use, understanding and appreciation of Standard Australian English, to enhance their personal, social, educational and vocational lives. The students learn to respond to and compose a wide variety of texts in a range of situations in order to be effective, creative and confident communicators.

English Extension is designed for students undertaking English Advanced who choose to study at a more intensive level in diverse but specific areas. They enjoy engaging with complex levels of conceptualisation and seek the opportunity to work in increasingly independent ways.


Building on English Learning in Stage 5
The principle of a learning continuum K-12 is central to the design of all English Stage 6 English courses. The outcomes have been aligned to common objectives and provide appropriate progression from Stage 5.

The outcomes and content are written with the assumption that students embarking on the English Standard course have achieved outcomes and studied content in the NSW English K-10 syllabus. Consequently everything in the NSW syllabus K-10 up to Stage 5 is also implicit in this Stage 6 syllabus. In a number of cases material is included to consolidate prior learning.

Students who undertake the English Standard course have a diverse range of literacy needs. The outcomes and content in the English Standard course provide opportunities for students to demonstrate knowledge, understanding and skills commensurate with Level 3 on the Australian Core Skills Framework (ACSF) in Reading and Writing. The ACSF provides a way of describing the generic skills identified as being critical to operating effectively in personal and community contexts including the workplace.

Schools and teachers should consider the learning needs of students when designing scope and sequences and differentiate teaching to include other areas of review as appropriate.


Aim
The study of English in Stage 6 enables students to understand and use language effectively. They appreciate, enjoy and reflect on the English language and make meaning in ways that are imaginative, creative, interpretive, critical and powerful. Students value the English language in its various textual forms to become thoughtful and effective communicators in a diverse global world.


Objectives
Knowledge, Understanding and Skills
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to:
? communicate through speaking, listening, reading, writing, viewing and representing
? use language to shape and make meaning according to purpose, audience and context
? think in ways that are imaginative, creative, interpretive and critical
? express themselves and their relationships with others and their world
? learn and reflect on their learning through their study of English.
Values and Attitudes
Students value and appreciate:
? the importance of the English language as a key to learning
? the personal enrichment to be gained from a love of English, literature and learning
? the power of language to explore and express views of themselves as well as the social, cultural, ethical, moral, spiritual and aesthetic dimensions of human experiences
? the power of effective communication using the language modes of speaking, listening, reading, writing, viewing and representing
? the role of language in developing positive interaction and cooperation with others
? the diversity and aesthetics of language through literary and other texts
? the independence gained from thinking imaginatively, creatively, interpretively and critically.


Outcomes
Table of Objectives and Outcomes - Continuum of Learning
Objective A
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to:
? communicate through speaking, listening, reading, writing, viewing and representing*Year 11 course outcomes
A student:Year 12 course outcomes
A student:EN11-1 responds to and composes increasingly complex texts for understanding, interpretation, analysis, imaginative expression and pleasure

EN11-2 uses and evaluates processes, skills and knowledge required to effectively respond to and compose texts in different modes, media and technologiesEN12-1 independently responds to and composes complex texts for understanding, interpretation, critical analysis, imaginative expression and pleasure

EN12-2 uses, evaluates and justifies processes, skills and knowledge required to effectively respond to and compose texts in different modes, media and technologies
*Some students with special education needs communicate through a variety of verbal or nonverbal communication systems or techniques. It is important to take account of the individual communication strategies used by these students within the context of the English Standard Stage 6 Syllabus.

Objective B
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to:
? use language to shape and make meaning according to purpose, audience and contextYear 11 course outcomes
A student:Year 12 course outcomes
A student:EN11-3 analyses and uses language forms, features and structures of texts, considers appropriateness for purpose, audience and context and explains effects on meaning

EN11-4 applies knowledge, skills and understanding of language concepts and literary devices into new and different contextsEN12-3 analyses and uses language forms, features and structures of texts and justifies their appropriateness for purpose, audience and context and explains effects on meaning

EN12-4 adapts and applies knowledge, skills and understanding of language concepts and literary devices into new and different contexts

Objective C
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to:
? think in ways that are imaginative, creative, interpretive and criticalYear 11 course outcomes
A student:Year 12 course outcomes
A student:EN11-5 thinks imaginatively, creatively, interpretively and analytically to respond to and compose texts that include considered and detailed information, ideas and arguments

EN11-6 investigates and explains the relationships between textsEN12-5 thinks imaginatively, creatively, interpretively, analytically and discerningly to respond to and compose texts that include considered and detailed information, ideas and arguments

EN12-6 investigates and explains the relationships between texts
Objective D
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to:
? express themselves and their relationships with others and their worldYear 11 course outcomes
A student:Year 12 course outcomes
A student:EN11-7 understands and explains the diverse ways texts can represent personal and public worlds

EN11-8 identifies and explains cultural assumptions in texts and their effects on meaningEN12-7 explains and evaluates the diverse ways texts can represent personal and public worlds

EN12-8 explains and assesses cultural assumptions in texts and their effects on meaning
Objective E
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to:
? learn and reflect on their learning through their study of EnglishYear 11 course outcomes
A student:Year 12 course outcomes
A student:EN11-9 reflects on, assesses and monitors own learning and develops individual and collaborative processes to become an independent learnerEN12-9 reflects on, assesses and monitors own learning and refines individual and collaborative processes as an independent learner

Year 11 Course Structure and Requirements
Year 11 course
(120 hours)English StandardIndicative hoursCommon module - Reading to Write: Transition to Senior English40Module A: Contemporary Possibilities40Module B: Close Study of Literature40Text requirementsThere are no prescribed texts for Year 11.

Students are required to study ONE complex multimodal or digital text in Module A. (This may include the study of film.)

Students are required to study ONE substantial literary print text in Module B, for example prose fiction, drama or a poetry text, which may constitute a selection of poems from the work of one poet.

Students must study a range of types of texts drawn from prose fiction, drama, poetry, nonfiction, film, media and digital texts.

The Year 11 course requires students to support the study of texts with their own wide reading.
For the English Standard Year 11 course students are required to:
? complete 120 indicative hours
? complete the common module as the first unit of work
? complete Modules A and B.

Across Stage 6 the selection of texts must give students experience of the following:
? a range of types of texts inclusive of prose fiction, drama, poetry, nonfiction, film, media and digital texts.
? texts which are widely regarded as quality literature, including a range of literary texts written about intercultural experiences and the peoples and cultures of Asia
? a range of Australian texts, including texts by Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander authors and those that give insights into diverse experiences of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples
? texts with a wide range of cultural, social and gender perspectives
? integrated modes of reading, writing, listening, speaking, viewing and representing as appropriate.


Year 12 Course Structure and Requirements
Year 12 course
(120 hours)English StandardIndicative hoursCommon module - Texts and Human Experiences30Module A: Language, Identity and Culture30Module B: Close Study of Literature30Module C: The Craft of Writing
Optional: This module may be studied concurrently with the common module and/or Modules A and B30Text requirementsStudents are required to closely study three types of prescribed texts, one drawn from each of the following categories:
? prose fiction
? poetry OR drama
? film OR media OR nonfiction

The selection of texts for Module C: The Craft of Writing does not contribute to the required pattern of prescribed texts for the course.

Students must study ONE related text in the Common module: Texts and Human Experiences.
For the English Standard Year 12 course students are required to:
? complete the Year 11 course as a prerequisite
? complete 120 indicative hours
? complete the common module as the first unit of work
? complete modules A, B and C over the course of the year.

Across Stage 6 the selection of texts must give students experience of the following:
? a range of types of texts inclusive of prose fiction, drama, poetry, nonfiction, film, media and digital texts.
? texts which are widely regarded as quality literature, including a range of literary texts written about intercultural experiences and the peoples and cultures of Asia
? a range of Australian texts, including texts by Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander authors and those that give insights into diverse experiences of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples
? texts with a wide range of cultural, social and gender perspectives
? integrated modes of reading, writing, listening, speaking, viewing and representing as appropriate.


Assessment and Reporting
Information about assessment in relation to the English Standard syllabus is contained in Assessment and Reporting in English Standard Stage 6. It outlines course-specific advice and requirements regarding:
? Year 11 and Year 12 school-based assessment requirements
? Year 11 and Year 12 mandatory components and weightings
? External assessment requirements including HSC examination specifications.

This information should be read in conjunction with requirements on the Assessment Certification Examination (ACE) website.

Additional advice is available in the Principles of Assessment for Stage 6.


Content
Content defines what students are expected to know and do as they work towards syllabus outcomes. It provides the foundations for students to successfully progress to the next stage of schooling or post-school opportunities.
Teachers will make decisions about content regarding the sequence, emphasis and any adjustments required based on the needs, interests, abilities and prior learning of students.
Content in Stage 6 syllabuses defines learning expectations that may be assessed in Higher School Certificate examinations.


Organisation of Content
The following diagram provides an illustrative representation of elements of the course and their relationship.

The course objectives express the knowledge, skills and understandings that are demonstrated through the outcomes and content. These are applied within the context of the modules and selected texts across Stage 6.




The Study of English
Meaning is central to the study of English. The study of English makes explicit the language forms and processes of meaning. English Stage 6 develops this by encouraging students to explore, critically evaluate and appreciate a wide variety of the texts of Australian and other societies, in various forms and media, including multimedia.

The study of English involves exploring, responding to and composing texts
? in and for a range of personal, social, historical, cultural and workplace contexts
? using a variety of language modes, forms, features and structures.

Meaning is achieved through responding and composing, which are typically interdependent and ongoing processes.
Content and the use of Terminology
Responding and composing
In Kindergarten to Year 12, the study of English is an active pursuit where students use language to learn about language. The key processes of responding to and composing texts are central to students using language purposefully and meaningfully and engaging with a wide range of texts.

'Responding' is the activity that occurs as students read, listen to or view texts. It encompasses the personal and intellectual connection a student makes with texts. It also recognises that students and the texts to which they respond reflect social contexts. Responding typically involves:
? shaping and arranging textual elements to explore and express ideas, emotions and values
? identifying, comprehending, selecting, articulating, imagining, critically analysing and evaluating.

'Composing' is the activity that occurs as students produce written, spoken or visual texts. Composing typically involves:
? shaping, making and arranging textual elements to explore and express ideas, emotions and values
? processes of imagining, drafting, appraising, reflecting and refining
? knowledge, understanding and use of the language forms, features and structures of texts.

As students undertake the key processes of responding to and composing texts in their study of English, they undertake a number of other integrated and concurrent processes which also highlight the importance of students as active users and learners of language. The processes in this syllabus are intended to emphasise student agency through students developing and applying knowledge and understanding of context and language forms and features, and reflecting on their learning. In addition to the key processes of responding and composing, these processes include:
? engaging personally with texts
? developing and applying contextual knowledge
? understanding and applying knowledge of language forms and features.

The key processes also help to organise and emphasise content in this syllabus within and across stages of learning.

Use of terminology
The use of the terms 'responder' and 'composer' are generic terms and should not replace the use of specific nomenclature for example 'reader', 'audience', 'poet', 'writer', 'novelist' or 'playwright' by teachers and students as appropriate.
Learning Across the Curriculum
Learning across the curriculum content, including the cross-curriculum priorities and general capabilities, assists students to achieve the broad learning outcomes defined in the NESA Statement of Equity Principles, the Melbourne Declaration on Educational Goals for Young Australians (December 2008) and in the Australian Government's Core Skills for Work Developmental Framework (2013).

Cross-curriculum priorities enable students to develop understanding about and address the contemporary issues they face.

The cross-curriculum priorities are:
? Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander histories and cultures 
? Asia and Australia's engagement with Asia 
? Sustainability 

General capabilities encompass the knowledge, skills, attitudes and behaviours to assist students to live and work successfully in the 21st century.

The general capabilities are:
? Critical and creative thinking 
? Ethical understanding 
? Information and communication technology capability 
? Intercultural understanding 
? Literacy 
? Numeracy 
? Personal and social capability 

NESA syllabuses include other areas identified as important learning for all students:
? Civics and citizenship 
? Difference and diversity 
? Work and enterprise 

Learning across the curriculum content is incorporated, and identified by icons, in the content of the English Standard Stage 6 Syllabus in the following ways.


Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Histories and Cultures 
The Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander histories and cultures cross-curriculum area encompasses the concepts of Country and Place, People, Culture and Identity. In their study of English, students recognise the histories, cultures, traditions and languages of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples for their foundational and central presence among contemporary Australian societies and cultures. Through the study of a wide range of texts in a variety of media, through discussion and research, and through teachers' programming emphasis, students are provided with opportunities to develop their understanding and appreciation of the cultural expression of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples as the most sustained in the world. Text lists for each course include a selection of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander literature to reflect this priority.

When planning and programming content relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander histories and cultures teachers are encouraged to:
? involve local Aboriginal communities and/or appropriate knowledge holders in determining suitable resources, or to use Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander authored or endorsed publications
? read the Principles and Protocols relating to teaching and learning about Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander histories and cultures and the involvement of local Aboriginal communities.
 Asia and Australia's Engagement with Asia 
There are strong social, cultural and economic reasons for Australian students to engage with Asia and with the contribution of Asian Australians to our society and heritage. Studying texts from Asia, about Asia and by Asian authors is one way to ensure that a creative and forward-looking Australia can engage with our place in the region. Students are provided with opportunities to develop understanding of the diversity of Asia's peoples, environments and traditional and contemporary cultures. Texts relevant to this priority are included in the text lists for each course.
Sustainability 
English provides the opportunities for the development of informed and reasoned points of view, discussion of issues, research and problem-solving. English provides students with the skills required to investigate and understand issues of environmental and social sustainability, and to communicate information and views about sustainability. For example, through analysis of media articles, documentaries and digital texts, students have the opportunity to research and discuss this global issue and learn the importance of respecting and valuing a wide range of world views.
Critical and Creative Thinking 
Critical and creative thinking is important to the study of and creation of texts in English Standard. Students analyse and evaluate issues and ideas presented in texts. In both thinking about and creating their own texts, they recognise and develop arguments, use evidence and draw reasoned conclusions.

Students experiment with text structures and language features as they transform and adapt texts for different purposes, contexts and audiences. Students use critical thinking when they use their knowledge of language to analyse a range of texts in relation to their purpose, context, audience, structural and language features, and underlying and unstated assumptions. They investigate the ways language is used to position individuals and social and cultural groups. Creative thinking enables students to apply imaginative and inventive capacities in the creation of their own original works.
Ethical Understanding 
In English ethical understanding is explored through the selection of texts for study, for example, when students engage with ethical dilemmas presented in texts, considering reasons for actions and implications of decisions.

They explore and question values, attitudes, perspectives and assumptions in texts, examining how they are presented, their impact on audiences and how they are reflected in their own responses. Through the study of English Standard students come to appreciate and develop greater empathy for the rights and opinions of others. They are provided with opportunities to develop increasingly advanced communication, research and presentation skills to express viewpoints.
Information and Communication Technology Capability 
There is a particular focus in English on ICT through the use of digital texts and on understanding and creating multimodal texts. For example, students explore the effects of sound and image as they consider how ideas are communicated in digital texts.

They use digital technologies when they access, manage and use information and when creating their own texts. They can develop skills in reading, viewing and responding to digital and multimodal texts and analysing the effects of the use of different media on meaning and interpretation.
Intercultural Understanding 
In English Standard intercultural understanding encourages students to make connections between their own experiences and the experiences of others. Through the study of contemporary texts, texts from the past and texts from diverse cultures, students explore and analyse these connections. Students can understand and express the relationships between language, culture, identity and values, particularly in the Australian context, and are able to appreciate and empathise with the cultural beliefs, attitudes and values of others. They study how cultural concepts, beliefs, practices and perspectives are represented in a range of textual forms and for a variety of purposes and audiences. They pay special attention to the contribution of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples and Asian cultures to literature and other media in Australia.
Literacy 
Literacy is embedded throughout all English Stage 6 syllabuses. It relates to a high proportion of the content descriptions across Years 11 and 12. Consequently, this particular general capability is not tagged in this syllabus.

The acquisition of proficient literacy capabilities is an aim that is integral to and embedded throughout English Standard. Literacy is the ability to use a repertoire of knowledge and skills to communicate and comprehend effectively in a wide variety of contexts, modes and media. The literacy knowledge and skills furthered through the study of English Standard provide students with strong foundations for current and future learning and for successful participation in the workplace, careers and wider society. The knowledge and skills also provide opportunities for personal enrichment through social interaction, further education, training and skilled employment, professional life and a range of cultural pursuits, including engagement with literature and the arts. Literacy knowledge and skills also enable students to better understand and negotiate the changing world in which they live and to contribute meaningfully and thoughtfully to a democratic society through becoming ethical and informed citizens.

Literacy is important in the development of the skills and strategies needed to express, interpret, and communicate complex information and ideas. In English Standard students apply, extend and refine their repertoire of literacy skills and practices as they examine how meaning is communicated and as they engage in creative response and argument. Students compare texts and consider them in relation to their contexts and purposes, and they consider how texts are created for specific purposes, contexts and audiences.
Numeracy 
Students can develop skills broadly related to numeracy in English Standard when they identify and use various numerical, measurement, spatial, graphical and statistical concepts and skills. For example, students use numeracy skills when they create and interpret sequences and spatial information, consider timing and sequence in texts, draw conclusions from statistical information, or use quantitative data as evidence in analytical texts.
Personal and Social Capability 
Students can develop personal and social capability in English Standard by enhancing their communication skills, teamwork and capacity to empathise with and appreciate the perspectives of others. Close study of texts assists students to understand different personal and social experiences, perspectives and challenges. Students identify and express their own opinions, beliefs and responses by interacting with a range of texts. English actively assists students in the development of communication skills needed for analysis, research and the expression of viewpoints and arguments. Students work collaboratively in teams and also independently as part of their learning and research endeavours.
Civics and Citizenship 
In their study of English, students have opportunities to respond imaginatively and critically to a range of literary and other texts drawn from a range of contexts, including social contexts. They continue to consider how civic and social issues relevant to their lives are represented in the media. The English Standard course is designed to provide opportunities for students to become proficient in literacy and in using English, thus further enabling them to fulfil their roles as Australian citizens. In the course of their study of English, students can also become increasingly aware of their roles as global citizens, and of the relationship between Australia and peoples of other nations and cultures.
Difference and Diversity 
Students experience and are provided with opportunities to value difference and diversity in their everyday lives. Age, beliefs, gender, disability, sexuality, language, socioeconomic status, ethnicity and race are some of the factors that comprise difference and diversity. In English Standard, students have the opportunity to study ways in which issues related to such differences and diversity are represented in literary texts, and in texts of other types. This imaginative investigation of complex ideas and emotions encourages the development of thoughtfulness and informed views, and an understanding of the features of a fair and just society that values difference and diversity.


Work and Enterprise 
The knowledge, skills and understanding developed in English are important to students' capacity to succeed in post-school education and careers. English Standard provides opportunities to further develop many of the key skills required for effective participation in work and higher learning environments, for working collaboratively and individually, and in acquiring, processing, assessing and communicating information, both orally and in a variety of textual forms. Through their study of English, students can also develop further competence in using language appropriately for particular audiences, purposes and contexts. Effective communication skills and an understanding of the power of the English language provides opportunities for students to develop personal confidence as they move forward into the next phases of their lives. Study of a wide range of texts also provides students with an empathetic understanding of the worlds of work and enterprise.
English Standard Year 11 Course Content
Year 11 Course Structure and Requirements
Year 11 course
(120 hours)English StandardIndicative hoursCommon module - Reading to Write: Transition to Senior English40Module A: Contemporary Possibilities40Module B: Close Study of Literature40Text requirementsThere are no prescribed texts for Year 11.

Students are required to study ONE complex multimodal or digital text in Module A. (This may include the study of film.)

Students are required to study ONE substantial literary print text in Module B, for example prose fiction, drama or a poetry text, which may constitute a selection of poems from the work of one poet.

Students must study a range of types of texts drawn from prose fiction, drama, poetry, nonfiction, film, media and digital texts.

The Year 11 course requires students to support the study of texts with their own wide reading.
For the English Standard Year 11 course students are required to:
? complete 120 indicative hours
? complete the common module as the first unit of work
? complete Modules A and B.

Across Stage 6 the selection of texts must give students experience of the following:
? a range of types of texts inclusive of prose fiction, drama, poetry, nonfiction, film, media and digital texts.
? texts which are widely regarded as quality literature, including a range of literary texts written about intercultural experiences and the peoples and cultures of Asia
? a range of Australian texts, including texts by Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander authors and those that give insights into diverse experiences of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples
? texts with a wide range of cultural, social and gender perspectives
? integrated modes of reading, writing, listening, speaking, viewing and representing as appropriate.


Objective A
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to communicate through speaking, listening, reading, writing, viewing and representing.
Outcome 1
A student:
› responds to and composes increasingly complex texts for understanding, interpretation, analysis, imaginative expression and pleasure EN11-1
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-1, ENLS6-2, ENLS6-3
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? investigate, appreciate and enjoy a wide range of texts and different ways of responding   
? compose personal responses to texts and consider the responses of others  

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? identify and describe the contexts of composing and responding, for example personal, social, historical, cultural and workplace contexts, and consider how these contexts impact on meaning    
? recognise the effects of their own contexts on their composing and responding
? analyse how texts are created in and for a variety of contexts, audiences and purposes (ACEEN001)

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? analyse the ways language features, text structures and stylistic choices represent perspective and influence audiences (ACEEN024) 
? explain how various language features, for example figurative, grammatical and multimodal elements create particular effects in texts and use these for specific purposes
? apply and articulate criteria used to evaluate a text or its ideas

Respond to and compose texts
? develop creative and informed interpretations of texts supported by close textual analysis (ACELR062)   
? compose texts that integrate different modes and media for a variety of audiences and purposes  


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Language and cultural understanding ESL scales strand organiser. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.2, 6.2, 7.2, 8.2; Reading and Responding: 4.6, 5.6, 6.6, 7.6; Writing: 4.10, 5.10, 6.10, 7.10.


Objective A
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to communicate through speaking, listening, reading, writing, viewing and representing.
Outcome 2
A student:
› uses and evaluates processes, skills and knowledge required to effectively respond to and compose texts in different modes, media and technologies EN11-2
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-4, ENLS6-5, ENLS6-6
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? appreciate the ways mode, medium and technology affect meaning and influence personal response 
? explore the ways different media and technologies influence the experience of a text, for example how reading pathways in digital texts can offer responders (readers, listeners, viewers, an audience and so on) autonomy  

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? consider the appropriateness of processes and technologies for particular purposes, audiences and contexts   
? assess the effects of the choice of mode and medium, including digital texts, in shaping the response of audiences in a variety of contexts (ACEEN003) 

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? consider how the reliability of texts is shaped and influenced by choices of medium
? experiment with and assess the effects of using multimodal and digital conventions, for example navigation, sound and image (ACEEN026) 

Respond to and compose texts
? locate suitable information sources, skimming for general meanings and scanning for specific information, note-taking, summarising, paraphrasing and using graphic organisers to collect and collate information (ACEEA010)    
? use and assess strategies for planning, drafting, editing and revising, correcting for errors, refining ideas and ensuring consistent and appropriate style (ACEEN055)  
? use different processes and technologies, individually and in groups, to generate, investigate, clarify, organise, refine and present information and ideas    
? create a range of texts by drawing on a range of technologies in, for example research, communication and representation of ideas (ACEEN012)   


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Strategies ESL scales strand organiser. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 6.4, 7.4, 8.4; Reading and Responding: 4.8, 5.8, 6.8, 7.8; Writing: 4.12, 5.12, 6.12, 7.12.


Objective B
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to use language to shape and make meaning according to purpose, audience and context.
Outcome 3
A student:
› analyses and uses language forms, features and structures of texts, considers appropriateness for purpose, audience and context and explains effects on meaning EN11-3
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-7
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? engage with increasingly complex texts to understand and appreciate the power of language in shaping meaning 

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? analyse how language choices are made for different purposes and in different contexts using appropriate metalanguage; for example personification, voice-over, flashback and salience (ACEEN002) 
? use appropriate form, content, style and tone for different purposes and audiences in real and imagined contexts (ACEEN011) 
? appreciate the use of Standard Australian English for a variety of purposes, audiences and contexts 
? understand and respect that Aboriginal language dialects and Aboriginal English are expressions of cultural heritage and identity  

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? explore the ways text structures, language features and stylistic choices are used in different types of texts (ACEEN005)
? use accurate spelling, punctuation, syntax and metalanguage (ACEEN017) 
? refine vocabulary choices to discriminate between shades of meaning, with deliberate attention to the effect on audiences
? analyse and assess the interplay between imaginative, persuasive and interpretive techniques; for example how anecdotes are used in speeches to amuse, inform or influence, or the use of characterisation in advertising (ACEEN030) 

Respond to and compose texts
? understand and explain how language forms, features and structures are effectively integrated in a range of quality literature and other texts
? use stylistic features to craft and communicate points of view (ACELR013) 
? use language forms, features and structures to shape meaning, influence responses and achieve particular effects 
? create cohesion in texts by strengthening the internal structure of paragraphs through the use of examples, quotations and substantiation of claims


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Language and cultural understanding and Language structures and features ESL scales strand organisers. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.2, 6.2, 7.2, 8.2; Reading and Responding: 4.6, 5.6, 5.7, 6.6, 6.7, 7.6, 7.7; Writing: 4.10, 5.10, 5.11, 6.10, 6.11, 7.10, 7.11.


Objective B
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to use language to shape and make meaning according to purpose, audience and context.
Outcome 4
A student:
› applies knowledge, skills and understanding of language concepts and literary devices into new and different contexts EN11-4
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-8
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? transfer knowledge of language and literary devices to engage with unfamiliar textual forms or texts in unfamiliar contexts  

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? appreciate and explain how composers (authors, poets, playwrights, directors, designers and so on) may transform and adapt texts for different purposes, contexts and audiences, for example appropriations in popular culture 
? transform and adapt texts for different purposes, contexts and audiences (ACEEN050)

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? use language features, including punctuation and syntax, for particular effects in new and different contexts 
? examine and evaluate the cohesion of syntax and content in familiar and unfamiliar texts
? investigate text structures and language features related to specific genres for different purposes and audiences (ACEEN052) 

Respond to and compose texts
? transform and adapt texts by changing context, perspective or point of view 
? transform personal experience into imaginative texts for particular contexts and audiences  


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Communication and Language and cultural understanding ESL scales strand organisers. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.1, 6.1, 7.1, 8.1; Reading and Responding: 4.5, 4.6, 5.5, 5.6, 6.5, 6.6, 7.5, 7.6; Writing: 4.9, 4.10, 5.9, 5.10, 6.9, 6.10, 7.9, 7.10.

Objective C
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to think in ways that are imaginative, creative, interpretive and critical.
Outcome 5
A student:
› thinks imaginatively, creatively, interpretively and analytically to respond to and compose texts that include considered and detailed information, ideas and arguments EN11-5
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-7, ENLS6-8
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? investigate a wide range of texts, including those by and about Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander People(s), in order to think broadly, deeply and flexibly in imaginative, creative, interpretive and analytical ways   
? investigate and reflect on the difference between initial personal response and more studied and complex response (ACELR003)  

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? understand how the contexts of composers (authors, poets, playwrights, directors, designers and so on) and responders influence their perspectives and ideas

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? understand and appreciate how different language forms, features and structures can be used to represent different ways of thinking 
? understand the effect of nominalisation in the writing of critical and creative texts
? analyse how vocabulary, idiom and rhetoric are used for different purposes and contexts (ACEEN006)
? explore the effects of figurative and rhetorical devices, for example emphasis, emotive language, metaphor and imagery in the construction of argument (ACEEN025)   

Respond to and compose texts
? select, interpret and draw conclusions about information and ideas in texts  
? use evaluative language, including emotive language and modality for particular purposes and effects.
? make connections between information and ideas and synthesise these in a range of critical and creative texts 
? compose critical and creative texts that explore increasingly complex ideas
? compose logical, ordered and cohesive texts that build effective arguments in response to the ideas generated through texts.
? select and apply appropriate textual evidence to support arguments (ACEEN035)   


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Communication and Language and cultural understanding ESL scales strand organisers. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.1, 6.1, 7.1, 8.1; Reading and Responding: 4.5, 4.6, 5.5, 5.6, 6.5, 6.6, 7.5, 7.6; Writing: 4.9, 4.10, 5.9, 5.10, 6.9, 6.10, 7.9, 7.10.


Objective C
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to think in ways that are imaginative, creative, interpretive and critical.
Outcome 6
A student:
› investigates and explains the relationships between texts EN11-6
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-10
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? develop an understanding of new texts by making connections with texts that are personally familiar  

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? consider the importance of context in explaining the similarities and differences between texts 
? investigate the ways in which texts are influenced by other texts and by contexts (ACELR019)  
? examine how genres and their conventions have changed and adapted over time (ACEEN046) 

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? explore and analyse the similarities and differences in language forms, features and structures between and among texts 
? understand the uses and purposes of intertextuality, for example references to or appropriations of other texts 
? understand how texts conform to or challenge generic conventions through their language forms, features and structures

Respond to and compose texts
? describe and explain the connections between texts including the ways in which particular texts are influenced by other texts.
? experiment with composing imaginative texts that make thematic or stylistic connections with other texts or refer to other texts for particular purposes 


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Communication and Language and cultural understanding ESL scales strand organisers. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.1, 6.1, 7.1, 8.1; Reading and Responding: 4.5, 4.6, 5.5, 5.6, 6.5, 6.6, 7.5, 7.6; Writing: 4.9, 4.10, 5.9, 5.10, 6.9, 6.10, 7.9, 7.10.


Objective D
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to express themselves and their relationships with others and their world.
Outcome 7
A student:
› understands and explains the diverse ways texts can represent personal and public worlds EN11-7
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-11
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? reflect on how their personal values and perspectives are confirmed or challenged through their engagement with a variety of texts including those by and about Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander People(s)   
? relate their responses to texts to aspects of human experience

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? identify and describe the social, moral and ethical positions represented in texts  
? understand how contexts influence the perspectives represented in texts and how audiences respond to them    

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? analyse the diverse ways in which creative, informative and persuasive texts can explore human experience, universal themes and social contexts  
? analyse the impact of language and structural choices on shaping own and others' perspectives (ACEEN028)   

Respond to and compose texts
? speculate on the possibility of different interpretations of texts when they are considered from different perspectives  
? compose critical and creative texts that reflect particular values and perspectives, including their own  


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Language and cultural understanding ESL scales strand organiser. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.2, 6.2, 7.2, 8.2; Reading and Responding: 4.6, 5.6, 6.6, 7.6; Writing: 4.10, 5.10, 6.10, 7.10.


Objective D
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to express themselves and their relationships with others and their world.
Outcome 8
A student:
› identifies and explains cultural assumptions in texts and their effects on meaning EN11-8
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-11
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? identify cultural assumptions in their own texts and in their responses to the texts of others  

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? recognise how context influences the cultural assumptions that underpin their own and others' compositions of, and responses to, texts   
? understand the contemporary application of Aboriginal cultural protocols in the production of texts in order to protect Indigenous cultural and intellectual property  

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? assess and reflect on the ways values and assumptions are conveyed (ACELR058) 
? analyse and discuss the ways ideas, voices and opinions are represented (ACEEN029) 

Respond to and compose texts
? analyse how language and argument can create or reflect bias that may shape cultural perspectives  
? analyse literary texts created by and about a diverse range of Australian people, including Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander People(s) and people with Asian heritage, and consider the different ways these texts represent people, places and issues    
? describe and explain cultural assumptions in texts, including texts by and about Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander People(s), and people with Asian heritage   


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Language and cultural understanding ESL scales strand organiser. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.2, 6.2, 7.2, 8.2; Reading and Responding: 4.6, 5.6, 6.6, 7.6; Writing: 4.10, 5.10, 6.10, 7.10.


Objective E
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to learn and reflect on their learning through their study of English.
Outcome 9
A student:
› reflects on, assesses and monitors own learning and develops individual and collaborative processes to become an independent learner EN11-9
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-12
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? monitor and assess the various ways they approach their learning in English  
? use ICT tools strategically to support learning

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? assess their own strengths and needs as learners and apply strategies to ensure their ongoing improvement   
? support the learning of others by objectively assessing their strengths and needs as learners and offering constructive feedback as appropriate  
? choose individual and collaborative processes appropriate for particular learning contexts   

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? use and understand the value of writing as a reflective tool 
? select and use appropriate metalanguage and textual forms to assess and reflect on learning  

Respond to and compose texts
? create texts reflecting on their own learning, considering how processes can be adjusted to ensure better learning outcomes   
? use constructive, critical feedback from others to improve learning, including their own composing and responding  
? assess the strengths and weaknesses of their own compositional style and amend compositions as a result of the process of feedback and reflection   


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Strategies ESL scales strand organiser. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.4, 6.4, 7.4, 8.4; Reading and Responding: 5.8, 6.8, 7.8; Writing: 4.12, 5.12, 6.12, 7.12.


Modules
Year 11 Common Module - Reading to Write
Transition to Senior English
In this module, students undertake the intensive and close reading of quality texts from a variety of modes and media. In doing so, they further develop the skills and knowledge necessary to appreciate, understand, analyse and evaluate how and why texts convey complex ideas, relationships, endeavours and scenarios. Central to this module is developing student capacity to respond perceptively to texts through their own considered and thoughtful writing and judicious reflection on their skills and knowledge as writers. Students read texts that are engaging thematically, aesthetically, stylistically and/or conceptually to inspire or provoke them to critique skilfully, or to respond imaginatively. Through the study of texts, students develop insights into the world around them, deepen their understanding of themselves and the lives of others and enhance their enjoyment of reading.

The careful selection of critical and creative texts that address the needs and interests of students provides opportunities for them to increase the command of their own written expression, and empower them with the confidence, skills and agility to employ language precisely, appropriately and creatively for a variety of purposes.

Wide reading and reflection provides students with the opportunity to make deeper connections and identify distinctions between texts to enhance their understanding of how knowledge of language patterns, structures and features can be applied to unfamiliar texts. Through imaginative re-creation students deepen their engagement with texts and investigate the role of written language in different modes and how elements for example tone, voice and image contribute to the way that meaning is made. By exploring texts that are connected by form, point of view, genre or theme, students examine how purpose, audience and context shape meaning and influence responses.

Through responding and composing for a range of purposes and audiences students further develop skills in comprehension, analysis, interpretation and evaluation. They investigate how various language forms and features such as structure, tone, imagery and syntax are used for particular effect. They analyse and assess texts using appropriate terminology, register and modality. By reading and writing complex texts they broaden the repertoire of their vocabulary and extend control of spelling, punctuation and grammar to gain further understanding of how their own distinctive voice may be expressed for specific purposes.

Module A: Contemporary Possibilities
In this module, students extend their knowledge, understanding and appreciation of the ways that different communication technologies shape the ways that we read, navigate, understand and respond to digital, multimedia, multimodal and nonlinear texts. They develop understanding of the creative possibilities made available through these rapidly evolving technologies in the ways we communicate and represent ideas and experiences.

Students engage in a detailed study of one complex multimodal or digital text for example film, media or interactive narratives. To support their study, students also explore a range of texts that typically use contemporary technologies such as film, television, online news services and specific social media platforms. They apply their understanding of the nature, scope and ethical use of digital technology in their own responding and composing.

Students develop a deeper appreciation and understanding of the power of communication technologies to reach a broad audience for a range of purposes and the significance of this mode of communication in a global world. Through a close study of the selected texts students appreciate the active roles of both composer (author, poet, playwright, director, designer and so on) and responder (reader, listener, viewer, an audience and so on) in controlling and choosing the reading pathways through texts. They analyse and interpret the ways composers use and manipulate a variety of aural, language and visual devices to shape our understanding of what we listen to, read or view and may explore notions of hybridity and intertextuality.

Through their responding and composing students gain increasing confidence in experimenting with a range of language and visual forms and features to individually or collaboratively design and create their own multimodal or digital texts to communicate and represent their ideas; understanding the importance of creating a responsible digital footprint.

Through viewing, listening or reading students analyse and assess the text's specific features and form. They express their knowledge and understanding, clearly and concisely, using appropriate register, structure and modality. They independently and collaboratively plan, draft, appraise and refine their own responses to texts applying the conventions appropriate to form of syntax, spelling and grammar.


Module B: Close Study of Literature
In this module, students develop their knowledge and appreciation of a substantial literary print text. Through their close study of and personal responses to the text in its entirety, students develop an understanding of the ways that language features, text structures and stylistic choices can be used in literary texts.

Students study one literary print text, for example a prose fiction, drama or a poetry text, which may constitute a selection of poems from the work of one poet. They identify, analyse and respond to the ideas in the text and the ways in which meaning is shaped. Students examine the conventions that are particular to their chosen literary form, and the ways that authors use, manipulate and/or challenge those conventions.

Through their critical and creative responses to the text, students develop their understanding of the use and effects of elements such as style, tone and mood. They further develop their critical skills to analyse and assess the ways meaning is shaped and conveyed.

Through their engagement with the text and their own compositions, students further develop their personal connections with, and enjoyment of the text, enabling them to express their personal interpretation of its meaning and importance. They express their ideas clearly and cohesively using appropriate register, structure and modality. They plan, draft and refine their own written and spoken texts, applying the conventions of syntax, spelling and grammar appropriately for their audience, context and purpose.
English Standard Year 12 Course Content
Year 12 Course Structure and Requirements
Year 12 course
(120 hours)English StandardIndicative hoursCommon module - Texts and Human Experiences30Module A: Language, Identity and Culture30Module B: Close Study of Literature30Module C: The Craft of Writing
Optional: This module may be studied concurrently with the common module and/or Modules A and B30Text requirementsStudents are required to closely study three types of prescribed texts, one drawn from each of the following categories:
? prose fiction
? poetry OR drama
? film OR media OR nonfiction

The selection of texts for Module C: The Craft of Writing does not contribute to the required pattern of prescribed texts for the course.

Students must study ONE related text in the Common module: Texts and Human Experiences.
For the English Standard Year 12 course students are required to:
? complete the Year 11 course as a prerequisite
? complete 120 indicative hours
? complete the common module as the first unit of work
? complete modules A, B and C over the course of the year.

Across Stage 6 the selection of texts must give students experience of the following:
? a range of types of texts inclusive of prose fiction, drama, poetry, nonfiction, film, media and digital texts.
? texts which are widely regarded as quality literature, including a range of literary texts written about intercultural experiences and the peoples and cultures of Asia
? a range of Australian texts, including texts by Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander authors and those that give insights into diverse experiences of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander Peoples
? texts with a wide range of cultural, social and gender perspectives
? integrated modes of reading, writing, listening, speaking, viewing and representing as appropriate.


Objective A
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to communicate through speaking, listening, reading, writing, viewing and representing.
Outcome 1
A student:
› independently responds to and composes complex texts for understanding, interpretation, critical analysis, imaginative expression and pleasure EN12-1
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-1, ENLS6-2, ENLS6-3
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? develop deeper textual understanding that enhances enjoyment in composing and responding to a range of complex texts including those by and about Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander People(s)    
? compose considered and well-crafted personal responses to texts and critically consider the responses of others   

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? examine the contexts of composing and responding, for example personal, social, cultural, historical and workplace contexts, and assess their effects on meaning in and through particular texts 
? explain how and why texts influence and position readers and viewers (ACEEN040)  

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? analyse and assess the ways language features, text structures and stylistic choices shape points of view and influence audiences (ACEEN024) 
? apply and articulate criteria used to evaluate a text or its ideas

Respond to and compose texts
? develop creative, informed and sustained interpretations of texts supported by close textual analysis (ACELR062)   
? compose texts that combine different modes and media for a variety of contexts, audiences and purposes 


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Language and cultural understanding ESL scales strand organiser. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.2, 6.2, 7.2, 8.2; Reading and Responding: 4.6, 5.6, 6.6, 7.6; Writing: 4.10, 5.10, 6.10, 7.10.


Objective A
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to communicate through speaking, listening, reading, writing, viewing and representing.
Outcome 2
A student:
› uses, evaluates and justifies processes, skills and knowledge required to effectively respond to and compose texts in different modes, media and technologies EN12-2
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-4, ENLS6-5, ENLS6-6
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? appreciate the ways mode, medium and technology shape meaning and influence personal response  

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? explain and assess the effects of technological forms and conventions on meaning in personal, social, historical, cultural and workplace contexts  
? analyse and assess how choice of mode and medium shapes the response of audiences (ACEEN003)

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? justify the use and assess the effects of using multimodal and digital conventions, for example navigation, sound and image (ACEENO26) 
? investigate the reliability of texts and how they may be shaped and influenced by choices of medium 
? analyse and assess the effects of the combination of linguistic, multimedial, interactive and navigational conventions on responses to texts

Respond to and compose texts
? independently use and assess strategies for planning, drafting, editing and revising, correcting for errors, refining ideas and ensuring consistent and appropriate style (ACEEN055)  
? use and assess different processes and technologies, individually and in groups, to generate, investigate, clarify, organise, refine and present information and ideas   
? compose and analyse texts in different modes, media and technologies for a variety of purposes  


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Language and cultural understanding ESL scales strand organiser. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.2, 6.2, 7.2, 8.2; Reading and Responding: 4.6, 5.6, 6.6, 7.6; Writing: 4.10, 5.10, 6.10, 7.10.


Objective B
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to use language to shape and make meaning according to purpose, audience and context.
Outcome 3
A student:
› analyses and uses language forms, features and structures of texts and justifies their appropriateness for purpose, audience and context and explains effects on meaning EN12-3
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-7
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? engage with complex texts through their language forms, features and structures to understand and appreciate the power of language to shape meaning  

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? understand and use language appropriately and effectively for particular purposes, for example making connections, questioning, challenging, analysing, speculating and generalising  
? analyse how language choices are made for different purposes and in different contexts using appropriate metalanguage (ACEEN002)  
? use appropriate and effective form, content, style and tone for different purposes and audiences and assess their effectiveness in real and imagined contexts (ACEEN011)   
? appreciate the uses and value of Standard Australian English for a variety of purposes, audiences and contexts  

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? explain the ways text structures, language features and stylistic choices are used in different types of texts (ACEEN005) 
? investigate and use specific vocabulary, including evaluative language, to express shades of meaning, feeling and opinion
? use accurate spelling, punctuation, syntax and metalanguage (ACEEN017) 
? analyse, assess and experiment with the interplay between imaginative, persuasive and interpretive techniques  

Respond to and compose texts
? understand and appreciate how language features, text structures and stylistic choices are effectively integrated in a range of quality literature and other texts and apply this understanding to their own compositions  
? control language features, text structures and stylistic choices of texts to shape meaning and influence responses    


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Strategies ESL scales strand organiser. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 6.4, 7.4, 8.4; Reading and Responding: 4.8, 5.8, 6.8, 7.8; Writing: 4.12, 5.12, 6.12, 7.12.


Objective B
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to use language to shape and make meaning according to purpose, audience and context.
Outcome 4
A student:
› adapts and applies knowledge, skills and understanding of language concepts and literary devices into new and different contexts EN12-4
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-8
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? assess how their knowledge of language features, text structures and stylistic choices helps them to engage with unfamiliar texts or textual forms   

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? analyse and appreciate how composers (authors, poets, playwrights, directors, designers and so on) create new texts, or transform and adapt texts for different purposes, contexts and audiences  
? adapt texts for different purposes, contexts and audiences (ACEEN050)  

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? make imaginative use of language features, including punctuation and syntax, for particular effects (ACEEN051)  
? use specific language and literary devices, for example rhetoric, to communicate broad ideas for different purposes  

Respond to and compose texts
? re-create texts by changing context, perspective or point of view and assess the effectiveness of these changes 
? use and manipulate generic forms in a range of modes and media for different audiences and purposes  
? use different ways of transforming experience and ideas into imaginative texts for particular audiences and contexts  
? sequence writing to produce cohesive and sustained texts


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Communication and Language and cultural understanding ESL scales strand organisers. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.1, 6.1, 7.1, 8.1; Reading and Responding: 4.5, 4.6, 5.5, 5.6, 6.5, 6.6, 7.5, 7.6; Writing: 4.9, 4.10, 5.9, 5.10, 6.9, 6.10, 7.9, 7.10.


Objective C
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to think in ways that are imaginative, creative, interpretive and critical.
Outcome 5
A student:
› thinks imaginatively, creatively, interpretively, analytically and discerningly to respond to and compose texts that include considered and detailed information, ideas and arguments EN12-5
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-9
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? investigate a wide range of texts, including those by and about Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander People(s), in order to think broadly, deeply and flexibly in imaginative, creative, interpretive and analytical ways   
? appreciate the value of thinking about texts in different ways   

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? analyse how the contexts of composers (authors, poets, playwrights, directors, designers and so on) or responders (readers, listeners, viewers, an audience and so on) influence their perspectives and ideas   

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? understand, assess and appreciate how different language features, text structures and stylistic choices can be used to represent different perspectives and attitudes  
? assess the effects of rhetorical devices, for example emphasis, emotive language and imagery in the construction of argument (ACEEN025)    

Respond to and compose texts
? synthesise information and ideas for a range of purposes, including development of sustained, evidence-based, logical and complex argument (ACEEN071)   
? use the information and ideas gathered from a range of texts to present perspectives in analytical, expressive and imaginative ways    
? assess their own and others' justifications, evidence and point of view (ACELR064)     


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Communication and Language and cultural understanding ESL scales strand organisers. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.1, 6.1, 7.1, 8.1; Reading and Responding: 4.5, 4.6, 5.5, 5.6, 6.5, 6.6, 7.5, 7.6; Writing: 4.9, 4.10, 5.9, 5.10, 6.9, 6.10, 7.9, 7.10.


Objective C
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to think in ways that are imaginative, creative, interpretive and critical.
Outcome 6
A student:
› investigates and explains the relationships between texts EN12-6
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-10
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? develop an increasing understanding and appreciation of new texts by making connections with familiar texts   

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? explain similarities and differences between and among texts with reference to their contexts 
? investigate the relationships between text and context by undertaking close analysis of texts (ACEEN060) 

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? compare the forms, features and structures of texts from different contexts to draw conclusions about their effectiveness in communicating ideas   
? understand and explain the purposes of intertextuality
? analyse and evaluate text structures and language features of literary texts and make relevant thematic and intertextual connections with other texts
? assess the ways in which texts conform to or challenge generic conventions through their language features, text structures and stylistic choices 

Respond to and compose texts
? explain and assess the ways in which particular texts are influenced by other texts and various contexts  
? compose imaginative texts that make thematic or stylistic connections with other texts or refer to other texts for particular purposes  


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Communication and Language and cultural understanding ESL scales strand organisers. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.1, 6.1, 7.1, 8.1; Reading and Responding: 4.5, 4.6, 5.5, 5.6, 6.5, 6.6, 7.5, 7.6; Writing: 4.9, 4.10, 5.9, 5.10, 6.9, 6.10, 7.9, 7.10.


Objective D
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to express themselves and their relationships with others and their world.
Outcome 7
A student:
› explains and evaluates the diverse ways texts can represent personal and public worlds EN12-7
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-11
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? explain how their personal values and perspectives are reconsidered through their engagement with a variety of texts, including those by and about Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander People(s)    

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? assess the impact of context on shaping the social, moral and ethical positions represented in texts   
? explain how responses to texts vary over time and in different cultural contexts (ACEEN031)  

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? analyse and assess the diverse ways in which creative and critical texts can represent human experience, universal themes and social contexts    
? analyse and assess the impact of language and structural choices on shaping own and others' perspectives (ACEEN028)   

Respond to and compose texts
? recognise and evaluate different interpretations of texts that derive from different perspectives  
? compose imaginative, interpretive and critical texts that reflect particular values and perspectives, including their own    
? analyse, explain and evaluate the ways ideas, voices and points of view are represented for particular purposes and effects (ACEEN029)    


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Language and cultural understanding ESL scales strand organiser. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.2, 6.2, 7.2, 8.2; Reading and Responding: 4.6, 5.6, 6.6, 7.6; Writing: 4.10, 5.10, 6.10, 7.10.


Objective D
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to express themselves and their relationships with others and their world.
Outcome 8
A student:
› explains and assesses cultural assumptions in texts and their effects on meaning EN12-8
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-11
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? identify and question cultural assumptions and values in their own texts and in their responses to the texts of others   

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? recognise and assess how context influences the explicit and implicit cultural assumptions that underpin their compositions, and their own and others' responses to texts   
? understand the contemporary application of Aboriginal protocols in the production of texts for the purpose of Indigenous cultural and intellectual property protection  

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? assess and reflect on the ways values and assumptions are conveyed (ACELR058)   
? assess different perspectives, attitudes and values represented in texts by analysing the use of voice and point of view (ACEEN064) 

Respond to and compose texts
? analyse how language and argument can create or reflect bias that may shape cultural perspectives    
? analyse literary texts created by and about a diverse range of Australian people, including Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander People(s) and people with Asian heritage, and assess the different ways these texts represent people, places and issues    
? analyse and assess cultural assumptions in texts, including texts by and about Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander People(s) and people with Asian heritage    


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Language and cultural understanding ESL scales strand organiser. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.2, 6.2, 7.2, 8.2; Reading and Responding: 4.6, 5.6, 6.6, 7.6; Writing: 4.10, 5.10, 6.10, 7.10.


Objective E
Through responding to and composing a wide range of texts and through the close study of texts, students develop knowledge, understanding and skills in order to learn and reflect on their learning through their study of English.
Outcome 9
A student:
› reflects on, assesses and monitors own learning and refines individual and collaborative processes as an independent learner EN12-9
Related Life Skills outcomes: ENLS6-12
Content
Students:
Engage personally with texts
? monitor and assess the effectiveness of their various learning strategies in English  
? recognise that reading, viewing and listening are active and interactive processes in which personal experiences and expectations influence understanding and interpretation

Develop and apply contextual knowledge
? assess their own strengths and needs as learners and apply strategies for ongoing improvement  
? support the learning of others by objectively assessing their strengths and needs as learners and offering constructive feedback as appropriate   
? assess individual and collaborative processes appropriate for particular learning contexts  
? assess how technology can be used to enhance their learning   

Understand and apply knowledge of language forms and features
? understand and use appropriate metalanguage and textual forms to assess and reflect on their own learning and that of others   

Respond to and compose texts
? use writing as a tool to reflect on their own learning, assessing how processes can be adjusted to ensure better learning outcomes  
? use critical and constructive feedback from others to improve learning, including their composing and responding  
? assess the strengths and weaknesses of their own compositional style and improve compositions as a result of the process of reflection  


ESL Scales
The levels on the ESL scales needed to achieve this English syllabus outcome are Writing level 7, Reading and Responding level 7 and Oral Interaction level 8.

An EAL/D student at this stage of schooling may be assessed at a range of levels on the ESL scales Writing and Reading and Responding strands from Beginning level 1 to level 7 and Oral Interaction strand from level 1 to level 8. Teachers plan a learning pathway for EAL/D students using the ESL scales outcomes and pointers. Teachers assess EAL/D students' current level of English on the ESL scales then plan teaching and learning activities to scaffold learning for students working towards the achievement of English syllabus outcomes.

For EAL/D students to achieve this English syllabus outcome the teaching focus and pathway of learning will be mainly within the Strategies ESL scales strand organiser. See ESL scales outcomes for Oral Interaction: 5.4, 6.4, 7.4, 8.4; Reading and Responding: 5.8, 6.8, 7.8; Writing: 4.12, 5.12, 6.12, 7.12.


Modules
Year 12 Common Module - Texts and Human Experiences
In this common module students deepen their understanding of how texts represent individual and collective human experiences. They examine how texts represent human qualities and emotions associated with, or arising from, these experiences. Students appreciate, explore, interpret, analyse and evaluate the ways language is used to shape these representations in a range of texts in a variety of forms, modes and media.

Students explore how texts may give insight into the anomalies, paradoxes and inconsistencies in human behaviour and motivations, inviting the responder to see the world differently, to challenge assumptions, ignite new ideas or reflect personally. They may also consider the role of storytelling throughout time to express and reflect particular lives and cultures. By responding to a range of texts they further develop skills and confidence using various literary devices, language concepts, modes and media to formulate a considered response to texts.

Students study one prescribed text and a range of short texts that provide rich opportunities to further explore representations of human experiences illuminated in texts. They make increasingly informed judgements about how aspects of these texts, for example context, purpose, structure, stylistic and grammatical features, and form shape meaning. In addition, students select one related text and draw from personal experience to make connections between themselves, the world of the text and their wider world.

By responding and composing throughout the module students further develop a repertoire of skills in comprehending, interpreting and analysing complex texts. They examine how different modes and media use visual, verbal and/or digital language elements. They communicate ideas using figurative language to express universal themes and evaluative language to make informed judgements about texts. Students further develop skills in using metalanguage, correct grammar and syntax to analyse language and express a personal perspective about a text.


Module A: Language, Identity and Culture
Language has the power to both reflect and shape individual and collective identity. In this module, students consider how their responses to written, spoken, audio and visual texts can shape their self-perception. They also consider the impact texts have on shaping a sense of identity for individuals and/or communities. Through their responding and composing students deepen their understanding of how language can be used to affirm, ignore, reveal, challenge or disrupt prevailing assumptions and beliefs about themselves, individuals and cultural groups.

Students study one prescribed text in detail, as well as a range of textual material to explore, analyse and assess the ways in which meaning about individual and community identity, as well as cultural perspectives, is shaped in and through texts. They investigate how textual forms and conventions, as well as language structures and features, are used to communicate information, ideas, values and attitudes which inform and influence perceptions of ourselves and other people and various cultural perspectives.

Through reading, viewing and listening, students analyse, assess and critique the specific language features and form of texts. In their responding and composing students develop increasingly complex arguments and express their ideas clearly and cohesively using appropriate register, structure and modality. Students also experiment with language and form to compose imaginative texts that explore representations of identity and culture, including their own. Students draft, appraise and refine their own texts, applying the conventions of syntax, spelling and grammar appropriately and for particular effects.


Module B: Close Study of Literature
In this module, students develop an informed understanding, knowledge and appreciation of a substantial literary text. Through their development of considered personal responses to the text in its entirety, students explore and analyse the particular ideas and characteristics of the text and understand the ways in which these characteristics establish its distinctive qualities.

Students study one text chosen from the list of prescribed texts. They engage in the extensive exploration and interpretation of the text and the ways composers (authors, poets, playwrights, directors, designers and so on) portray people, ideas, settings and situations in texts. By analysing the interplay between the ideas, forms and language within the text, students appreciate how these elements may affect those responding to it. Students produce critical and creative responses to the text, basing their judgements on a detailed knowledge of the text and its language features.

Through reading, viewing or listening, students analyse, assess and comment on the text's specific language features and form. They express increasingly complex ideas, clearly and cohesively, using appropriate register, structure and modality. They draft, appraise and refine their own texts, applying the conventions of syntax, spelling and grammar appropriately.

Through their analyses and assessment of the text and their own compositions, students further develop their personal and intellectual connections with, and enjoyment of the text, enabling them to express their informed personal interpretation of its significance and meaning.


Module C: The Craft of Writing
In this module, students strengthen and extend their knowledge, skills and confidence as writers. They write for a range of authentic audiences and purposes to convey ideas with power and increasing precision.

Students appreciate, examine and analyse at least two challenging short prescribed texts as well as texts from their own wide reading, as models and stimulus for the development of their own ideas and written expression. They examine how writers of complex texts use language creatively and imaginatively for a range of purposes, to describe the world around them, evoke emotion, shape a perspective or to share a vision.

Through the study of texts drawn from enduring, quality texts of the past as well as from recognised contemporary works, students appreciate, analyse and assess the importance and power of language. Through a considered appraisal of, and imaginative engagement with these texts, students reflect on the complex and recursive process of writing to further develop their ability to apply their knowledge of textual forms and features in their own sustained and cohesive compositions.

During the pre-writing stage, students generate and explore ideas through discussion and speculations. Throughout the stages of drafting and revising, students experiment with a range of language forms and features for example imagery, rhetoric, voice, characterisation, point of view, dialogue and tone. Students consider purpose and audience to carefully shape meaning. During the editing stages students apply the conventions of syntax, spelling, punctuation and grammar appropriately and effectively for publication.

Students have opportunities to work independently and collaboratively to reflect, refine and strengthen their own skills in producing crafted, imaginative, discursive, persuasive and informative texts.

Note: Students may revisit prescribed texts from other modules to enhance their experiences of quality writing.

Glossary
Glossary termDefinitionAboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander PeoplesThe term describes people who are either Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander or are Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander.

An Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander person is someone who:
* is of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander descent
* identifies as an Aboriginal person and/or Torres Strait Islander person, and
* is accepted as such by the Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander community in which they live.Aboriginal cultural protocolsAboriginal cultural protocols describe appropriate ways of behaving, communicating and showing respect for diversity of histories and cultures. This involves appreciation of the knowledge, standing and status of people within the local Aboriginal community. Protocols inevitably vary between communities, and between people within a community. In establishing partnerships between Aboriginal communities and industries or professions, it is especially important that protocols are acknowledged and respected.Aboriginal EnglishAboriginal English is a dialect of Standard Australian English. It is a distinctly Aboriginal kind of English and is a powerful vehicle for the expression of Aboriginal identity (see Diane Eade 1995, Aboriginal English, Board of Studies NSW, Sydney).active listeningA formal listening technique that develops communication skills through the processes of understanding information, remembering and retaining it and responding appropriately.active voice(see voice)adjectiveA word class that describes a noun to add extra meaning. Different types of adjectives include:
? possessive adjectives, for example my, his, her
? numbering adjectives, for example two, many, lots of
? describing adjectives, for example big, old, yellow, beautiful
? comparing adjectives, for example more delicate, best, bigger
? classifying adjectives, for example Persian cat, air transport.adverbA word class that modifies:
? a verb, for example 'She sings beautifully.'
? an adjective, for example 'He is really interesting.'
? another adverb, for example 'She walks very slowly.'

In English many adverbs have an -ly ending.adverbialAn adverbial phrase or clause contributes additional information to the main clause. Generally, these will answer the questions:
? how, for example 'They walked to town very quickly.'
? when, for example 'She had dinner after everyone had left.'
? where, for example 'I spoke with him outside the house.'
? why, for example 'Tom felt tired because he had run a marathon.'

An adverbial can also contribute evaluative interpersonal meaning to a clause, for example 'Frankly, I don't care'. Adverbs, adverb groups, prepositional phrases, nouns and noun groups can function as adverbials.aestheticRelating to a sense of beauty or an appreciation of artistic expression. The selection of texts that are recognised as having aesthetic or artistic value is an important focus of the study of literature.allegoryA story in prose fiction, poetry, drama or visual language that has more than one level of meaning. The characters, events and situations can represent other characters, events and situations. For example, the witch trials in The Crucible are an allegory of the US HUAC hearings in the 1950s. Allegories often represent moral or political situations.alliterationThe recurrence, in close succession, of the same consonant sounds usually at the beginning of words. In 'ripe, red raspberry', the repetition of the 'r' sound creates a rich aural effect, suggesting the lusciousness of the fruit.allusionA deliberate and implicit reference to a person or event, or a work of art which draws on knowledge and experiences shared by the composer and responder.alphabetic principleThe awareness of the systematic relationship between letters and sounds. This involves understanding that letters represent sounds, that speech can be turned into print and that print can be turned into speech.analogyA comparison demonstrating the similarities between two things, people or situations. It is a device to clarify an idea through a connection. Analogies are often used in persuading, explaining or arguing a point.animationA simulation of movement created by displaying a series of pictures or frames, for example a cartoon.antonymA word or word group with a meaning opposite to that of another word or word group, for example hot (cold), go away (come back).apostrophe (')A punctuation marker used to:
? indicate possession, for example 'Rosie's cup'. Note: an apostrophe attaches to nouns, not possessive pronouns such as hers, his, its, theirs, ours
? indicate missing letters or numbers in a contracted expression, for example 'He's gone home', 'It's news to me'.appositionWhen one noun group immediately follows another with the same reference, they are said to be in apposition, for example 'our neighbour, Mr Grasso ...', 'Canberra, the capital of Australia ...'.appreciationThe act of discerning quality, value and enjoyment in imaginative, informative and persuasive texts.appropriationTaking an object or text from one context and using it in another context. The process can allow new insights into the original text or object and emphasise contextual differences. Appropriation also gives extra insight into the newly created or used text or object. Texts can be appropriated for a range of purposes, including satirical criticism, consideration of existing ideas in a new context and exploration of cultural assumptions. The mass media frequently appropriate words, images and icons from other cultural contexts. Films and novels are often appropriations of earlier texts.argumentThe reasons and evidence given to support an idea or a proposition.articleThere are three articles in the English language: a, an, the. Articles are placed before nouns and form part of the noun group when referring to either a specific person or thing (the) or a non-specific person or thing (a, an). The is called a definite article; a and an are called indefinite articles.audienceThe intended group of readers, listeners or viewers that the writer, designer, filmmaker or speaker is addressing.authorThe composer or originator of a work (for example a novel, play, poem, film, website, speech, essay, autobiography). Author is most commonly used in relation to novels.auxiliary verbA verb that gives further semantic or syntactic information about a main or full verb. The most common auxiliary verbs are be, do and have. Note that they are only auxiliary verbs when connected to another verb. They can be used as verbs on their own. Will and shall are auxiliary verbs used to express future time. Modal auxiliaries, for example shall, could and might also operate to adjust verb meanings.biasIn argument or discussion, to favour one side or viewpoint by ignoring or excluding conflicting information; a prejudice against something.body languageA form of non-verbal communication which consists of body movements and postures, gestures, facial expressions, and eye and mouth movements, for example crossed arms or leaning away from or towards another person.brackets(see parentheses)breadcrumb trailA method for providing ways to navigate through a website. The breadcrumb trail shows where users are, how they got there, and how to move back to the places they have been. An example of a breadcrumb trail is: Home > Products > Purchase > Checkout.camera angleThe angle at which the camera is pointed at the subject. It is the perspective from which the camera shoots and from which the viewer ultimately sees the image. Vertical angle can be low, level or high. Horizontal angle can be oblique (side on) or frontal.clauseA clause is a complete message or thought expressed in words. The essential component of a clause is a finite verb or verb group, for example 'She played in the sandpit', 'Duc was running home'.
? A main clause (also known as a principal or independent clause) is a clause that can stand alone as a complete sentence, though it may be joined with other clauses, for example 'The child came first'.
? A subordinate clause (also known as a dependent clause) is a group of words that cannot stand alone or make complete sense on its own. It needs to be combined with a main clause to form a complete sentence. Subordinate clauses will usually be adjectival or adverbial clauses.
? An adjectival clause is a clause that provides information which defines the qualities or characteristics of the person or thing named. It usually begins with a relative pronoun and is sometimes called a relative clause, for example 'The child who had the red top came first'.
? An adverbial clause is a clause that modifies the verb in the main clause, for example 'The child came first because he was the fastest runner'.
? An embedded clause occurs within the structure of another clause, often as a qualifier to a noun group, for example 'The man who came to dinner is my brother'.cohesionThat quality in a text determined by its parts being related and contributing to its overall unity. Cohesion is achieved through shaping the form, creating a structure that the responder can recognise and use to navigate the text, and using features of language that link the various parts of the text into a complete whole. These features can include connectives such as 'furthermore' and 'therefore', cross-references to different parts of the text, and reiteration of the title or terms of the topic or question being addressed in the text.cohesive linksThose language features that help to develop unity within a text. Cohesion can involve referring words such as pronouns, eg 'Tony wanted to escape but he couldn't run', or content words that are related in various ways, for example 'Tony wanted to escape but was too tired to run'.collaborative learningAn approach to teamwork that enables students to combine their individual skills and resources to generate creative solutions to problems.collocationWords that commonly occur in close association with one another (for example, 'blonde' goes with 'hair', 'butter' is 'rancid' not 'rotten', 'salt and pepper' not 'pepper and salt').colloquialInformal expression of language, characteristic of speech and often used in informal writing. The register of everyday speech.colon (:)A punctuation convention used to separate a general statement from one or more statements that provide additional information, explanation or illustration. The statements that follow the colon do not have to be complete sentences. They will generally form a list and may be set out in dot points.comma (,)A punctuation marker used to indicate the grammatical organisation of sentences. Commas are used in sentences:
? to indicate separation between parts of a sentence such as clauses or phrases, where such separation is important to the meaning, for example 'Children, who cannot lift such heavy weights, will not be allowed to participate', 'Children who cannot lift such heavy weights will not be allowed to participate'.
? to separate words, phrases or numbers in a series, for example 'Children like to eat apples, bananas, oranges and watermelons'.command (or imperative)A sentence that gives direction or seeks an active response, for example 'Leave now!', 'Go!' Commands always end with an exclamation mark.communication technologiesAn overarching term encompassing the technologies (applications and devices) that facilitate wide scale communication. These may include film, websites, email and social networking platforms.complex sentence(see sentence)composerA collective noun to include an author, poet, playwright, director, designer and so on.composingThe activity that occurs when students produce written, spoken or visual texts. Composing typically involves:
? the shaping and arrangement of textual elements to explore and express ideas, emotions and values
? the processes of imagining, organising, analysing, drafting, appraising, synthesising, reflecting and refining
? knowledge, understanding and use of the language forms, features and structures of texts
? awareness of audience and purpose.compositionThe combination and integration of the various elements of an image into a whole text.compound sentence(see sentence)compound wordA word consisting of two or more words that has a meaning different from that of the individual words, for example farmyard.comprehension strategiesStrategies and processes by which readers bring meaning to and extract meaning from texts. Key comprehension strategies include:
? activating and using prior knowledge
? identifying literal information explicitly stated in the text
? making inferences based on information in the text and their own prior knowledge
? predicting likely future events in a text
? visualising by creating mental images of elements in a text
? summarising and organising information from a text
? integrating ideas and information in texts
? critically reflecting on content, structure, language and images used to construct meaning in a text.concepts about printConcepts about how English print works. They include information about where to start reading and how the print travels from left to right across the page. Concepts about print are essential for beginning reading.conjunctionA word that joins other words, phrases or clauses together in logical relationships such as addition, time, cause or comparison. There are two major types of conjunctions for linking messages:
? coordinating conjunctions link words, phrases and clauses in such a way that the elements have equal status in meaning. They include conjunctions such as and, or, but
? subordinating conjunctions introduce certain kinds of subordinate clauses. They include words such as that, whether (or if), while, after, when, because, if (in the conditional sense) and serve to mark the kind of subordinate clause introduced.connectiveWords which link paragraphs and sentences in logical relationships of time, cause and effect, comparison or addition. Connectives relate ideas to one another and help to show the logic of the information. Connectives are important resources for creating cohesion in texts. The logical relationships can be grouped as follows:
? temporal - to indicate time or sequence ideas, for example first, second, next
? causal - to show cause and effect, for example because, for, so
? additive - to add information, for example also, besides, furthermore
? comparative - for example rather, alternatively
? conditional/concessive - to make conditions or concession, for example yet, although
? clarifying - for example in fact, for example.connotationThe nuances or shades of meaning attached to words, beyond that of their literal or dictionary meanings. Connotations may be positive, negative or neutral.contextThe range of personal, social, historical, cultural and workplace conditions in which a text is responded to and composed.contractionA contraction is a shortened form of one or two words (one of which is usually a verb). In a contraction, an apostrophe takes the place of the missing letter or letters. Some contractions are: I'm (I am), can't (cannot), how's (how is), and Ma'am (Madam).conventionAn accepted language practice that has developed over time and is generally used and understood, for example use of punctuation.coordinating conjunctionsWords that link phrases and clauses in such a way that the elements have equal status in meaning. Examples of these conjunctions include and, or, either/neither, but, so and then (see conjunction).create/composeDevelop and/or produce spoken, written or multimodal texts in print, visual, oral or digital forms.creating/composing'Creating' refers to the development and/or production of spoken, written, visual or multimodal texts in print, graphic or digital forms.creativityThe dynamic process of using language to conceptualise, interpret and synthesise ideas in order to develop a 'product'.criticalExploration of the quality of argument, content, analysis, information or persuasion in oral, visual or written text, to assess the way in which themes, issues or ideas are presented for the audience and purposes intended.cultural assumptionBeliefs or attitudes about such things as gender, religion, youth, age, disability, sexuality, social class and work that are taken for granted as being part of the fabric of the social practices of a particular culture. Cultural assumptions underlie cultural expressions in texts and may also be embedded in texts in various ways.cultural expressionThe articulation or representation of beliefs, practices or attitudes pertaining to a particular culture.cultureThe social practices and ways of thinking of a particular people or group, including shared beliefs, values, knowledge, customs, lifestyle and artefacts.dash (-)A punctuation marker used to indicate a break or pause in a sentence or to begin and end a parenthetical clause. It is increasingly used in formal and informal writing where traditionally a colon, semicolon or comma may have been used, for example in a parenthetical clause.decodeThe process in which knowledge of letter-sound relationships, including knowledge of letter patterns, is used to identify written words.dependent clause(see clause)designThe way particular elements are selected, organised and used in the process of text construction for particular purposes. These elements might be linguistic (words), visual (images), audio (sounds), gestural (body language), spatial (arrangement on the page, screen or 3D) and multimodal (a combination of more than one).dialectThe forms of a given language which differ from one another in details of sound system, vocabulary and grammar, each of which is usually to be found in a particular region or social class.digital textsAudio, visual or multimodal texts produced through digital or electronic technology which may be interactive and include animations and/or hyperlinks. Examples of digital texts include DVDs, websites, e-literature (e-books) and apps.digraphTwo letters that represent a single sound (phoneme). Vowel digraphs are two vowels (oo, ea). Consonant digraphs have two consonants (sh, th). Vowel/consonant digraphs have one vowel and one consonant (er, ow).directionalityThe direction in which English print is read. Early readers need to learn where to start reading and in which direction the print travels, noting that other languages may not follow this convention.discourse markersWords and phrases used in speaking and writing to 'signpost' discourse by showing turns, joining ideas together, showing attitude, and generally controlling communication. Some people regard discourse markers as a feature of spoken language only (for example, 'actually', 'so', 'OK', 'right?', 'anyway').discursive textsTexts whose primary focus is to explore an idea or variety of topics. These texts involve the discussion of an idea(s) or opinion(s) without the direct intention of persuading the reader, listener or viewer to adopt any single point of view. Discursive texts can be humorous or serious in tone and can have a formal or informal register. They include texts such as feature articles, creative nonfiction, blogs, personal essays, documentaries and speeches.e-literatureThe electronic publication of literature using the multimedia capabilities of digital technologies to create interactive and possibly non-linear texts, through combining written text, movement, visual, audio and spatial elements. It may include hypertext fiction, computer art installations, kinetic poetry and collaborative writing projects allowing readers to contribute to a work. E-literature also includes texts where print meanings are enhanced through digital images and/or sound and literature that is reconstituted from print texts, for example online versions of The Little Prince or Alice in Wonderland. In the form of e-books they are constructed to be read through e-readers and electronic tablets.electronic mediaMedia technology, for example television, the internet, radio and email, that communicates with large numbers of people. Much electronic media will be interactive.ellipsisEllipsis is the omission of words where:
? words repeat what has gone before and these terms are simply understood, for example 'The project will be innovative. To be involved (in the project) will be exciting.'
? a word like one is substituted for a noun or noun group, as in 'There are lots of apples in the bowl. Can I have one?' (of them)
? a cohesive resource binds text together and is commonly used in dialogue for speed of response, for example (Do you) 'Want a drink?'/'Thanks' (I would like a drink)
? three dots (also known as points of ellipsis) are used to indicate such things as surprise or suspense in a narrative text or that there is more to come in an on-screen menu
? the points of ellipsis take the place of sections of text when quoting from a source.emailElectronic mail. Correspondence sent and received using electronic addresses, including messages, documents and graphics.emotive languageLanguage that creates an emotional response.etymologyThe origins of, and changes to, words in relation to meaning, for example words derived from earlier or other languages, place names, words derived from people's names, coinages (for example googling). (See word origin.)evaluative languagePositive or negative language that judges the worth of something. It includes language to express feelings and opinions, to make judgements about aspects of people such as their behaviour, and to assess the quality of objects such as literary works. It includes evaluative words. The language used by a speaker or writer to give a text a particular perspective (for example judgemental, emotional, critical) in order to influence how the audience will respond to the content of the text.everyday and workplace textsTexts that communicate in everyday situations and workplaces. Everyday and workplace texts are composed with a sensitivity to the broad range of language competencies among the intended audience, and the contexts within which they are placed. Examples of everyday texts include road signs, information texts provided by government departments and instructions on appropriate behaviour in places like schools, restaurants and parks. Examples of workplace texts include safety signs, information texts relating to workplace procedures, and texts that use the jargon of the workplace.exclamation mark (!)A punctuation marker used at the end of a sentence to emphasise the emotion or feeling that is contained in the sentence. In some forms, such as personal letters, it may be used to strengthen the humorous element in a sentence, for example 'We found the cat asleep in the rubbish bin!' Exclamation marks are always used at the end of sentences containing a command - Go!figurative languageWords or phrases used in a way that differs from the expected or everyday usage. Figurative language creates comparisons by linking the senses and the concrete to abstract ideas. Words or phrases are used in a non-literal way for particular effect, for example simile, metaphor, personification. Figurative language may also use elements of other senses, as in hearing with onomatopoeia, or in combination as in synaesthesia.finite verbsVerbs that have a specific tense and a subject with which they grammatically agree (see verb). A complete sentence must contain a finite verb.fluencyEase of flow, for example in talking, reading, handwriting and spelling.framingThe way in which elements in a still or moving image are arranged to create a specific interpretation of the whole. Strong framing creates a sense of enclosure around elements while weak framing creates a sense of openness.full stop (.)A punctuation marker used to indicate the end of a sentence that is a statement or command, for example 'Maria came into the room.', 'Come into the room, Maria.'gazeThe directed look of either a viewer or figure in an image, including demand and offer.gender? In text study, exploration of the way notions of gender identity are constructed by the language and values of the text.
? In grammar, a requirement for agreement between nouns, adjectives, verbs and pronouns that must agree when they are referring to males or females.genreThe categories into which texts are grouped. The term has a complex history within literary and linguistic theory and is often used to distinguish texts on the basis of, for example, their subject matter (detective fiction, romance, science fiction, fantasy fiction) and form and structure (poetry, novels, short stories).grammarThe structure of the language we use and the description of language as a system. In describing language, attention is paid to both structure (form) and meaning (function) at the level of the construction of words (graphemes), the word, the sentence and the text.grammatical/syntactical informationInformation about language structure in comprehending a text, for example sentence structure, text organisation and word order.graphemeA letter or combination of letters that corresponds to or represents phonemes, for example the f in frog, the ph in phone, the gh in cough.graphologicalVisual information about words and texts in print, for example letter sequences, punctuation. The 26 letters that make up the English alphabet are the basic data of the system of writing and reading. Each individual word in a printed text is visually identifiable because it is made up of a unique subset and sequence of these letters. In the reading process graphological knowledge involves identification of printed words through visual processing. The visual processing system gradually builds up detailed images of a growing number of words that it can process automatically (with the aid of other processing systems). Accuracy, fluency and, eventually, automatic recognition of words by sight depend greatly on the completeness and rapidity of one's visual memory of the words. In early processing, the whole word is recognised as an image, but later processing involves combining letter sequences, use of which is facilitated by phonological knowledge. Graphological knowledge is also required for spelling and handwriting.graphophonic knowledgeThe knowledge of how letters in printed English relate to the sounds of the language.handwritingThe production of legible, correctly formed letters by hand with the assistance of writing tools.high-frequency sight wordsThe most common words used in written English text. They are sometimes called 'irregular words' or 'sight words'. Many common or high-frequency words in English are not able to be decoded using sound-letter correspondence because they do not use regular or common letter patterns. These words need to be learned by sight, for example come, was, were, one, they, watch, many, through.home languageA language acquired and used in the home or community by members of a family, for example speaking Mandarin at home in an English-speaking country.homographA word with the same spelling as another, but of different origin and meaning, for example wind (the wind blows), wind (wind the clock).homonymA word having the same sound and the same spelling, but a different meaning, for example strike (verb), strike (noun).homophoneA word having the same sound as another but different spelling and meaning, for example bear, bare.hybrid textsComposite texts resulting from mixing elements from different sources or genres (for example infotainment). Email is an example of a hybrid text, combining the immediacy of talk and the expectation of a reply with the permanence of print.hyperlinkAn area of a web page or email (either text or an image) that the user can click on in order to go to another item or source of information.hyphen (-)A punctuation marker used to indicate that a word is divided. The hyphen is placed between syllables or, in the case of compounds, between the parts of the word, for example role-play, self-correcting, pre-eminent. In print it may be used to break a word across a line to ensure a consistent right margin.iconAn image or likeness that carries meaning beyond its literal interpretation. The cross is an icon that represents Christianity, the Sydney Opera House is an icon that represents Sydney or Australia. The meaning of 'icon' has also broadened to refer to an image or likeness that is admired and valued because of the qualities inherent in what it represents. For example, leading figures in popular culture enjoy iconic status when they are seen as representing admired qualities such as intelligence, creativity, leadership, courage, talent, physical strength, grace or endurance.iconographyThe visual images and symbols associated with a particular person, place, event, situation or concept.idiomAn expression peculiar to a language, that cannot be taken literally, for example 'I've got a frog in my throat'.idiomatic expressionsWords or ways of speaking which are peculiar to a language or area. The users of the text understand it to mean something other than its literal translation. Idiomatic expressions give a distinctive flavour to speech or writing, for example 'on thin ice', 'fed up to the back teeth'. They can be over-used, to the point of cliché.imageryThe use of figurative language or illustrations to represent objects, actions or ideas.imaginativeThe ability to use the mind for a wide array of purposes. These purposes include, but are not limited to, creating and forming images, ideas and thoughts, developing new insights, reflecting on one's own self and others, and solving problems.imaginative text(see types of texts)Indigenous cultural and intellectual propertyIncludes objects, sites, cultural knowledge, cultural expression and the arts, that have been transmitted or continue to be transmitted through generations as belonging to a particular Indigenous group or Indigenous people as a whole or their territory.indirect speech(see reported speech)inferenceThe process of drawing conclusions based on evidence from a text.informative text(see types of texts)interpretiveResponding to a text in order to draw meaning from it.intertextualityThe associations or connections between one text and other texts. Intertextual references can be more or less explicit and self-conscious. They can take the form of direct quotation, parody, allusion or structural borrowing (see appropriation).intonationThe pattern of pitch changes revealed in speech.ironyA clash between what the words say and what they mean. Irony has three forms:
? rhetorical irony - saying something contrary to what is meant, for example 'I had a great time' (I was bored)
? dramatic irony - stating or doing something unaware of its contrast with the real situation, for example where the reader or watcher knows disaster is about to befall a character who says 'I've never been happier'
? situational irony where events are opposite to expectations.juxtapositionThe placement of two or more ideas, characters, actions, settings, phrases or words side-by-side for a particular purpose, for example to highlight contrast or for rhetorical effect.languageA system of meaning, in spoken, written, visual and physical modes, for communicating ideas, thoughts and feelings.language conceptsAn overarching term including language forms and features, modes, and pattern.language featuresThe features of language that support meaning, for example sentence structure, vocabulary, illustrations, diagrams, graphics, punctuation, figurative language. Choices in language features and text structures together define a type of text and shape its meaning (see structures of texts). These choices vary according to the purpose of a text, its subject matter, audience and mode or media of production.language forms and featuresThe symbolic patterns and conventions that shape meaning in texts. These vary according to the particular mode or media of production and can include written, spoken, non-verbal or visual communication of meaning (see textual form).language modesListening, speaking, reading, writing, viewing and representing. These modes are often integrated and interdependent activities used in responding to and composing texts in order to shape meaning. It is important to realise that:
? any combination of the modes may be involved in responding to or composing print, sound, visual or multimedia texts
? the refinement of the skills in any one of the modes develops skills in the others. Students need to build on their skills in all language modes.language patternsThe arrangement of identifiable repeated or corresponding elements in a text. These include patterns of repetition or similarity (for example the repeated use of verbs at the beginning of each step in a recipe or the repetition of a chorus after each verse in a song). The patterns may alternate (for example the call and response pattern of some games or the to and fro of a dialogue). Other patterns may contrast (for example opposing viewpoints in a discussion or contrasting patterns of imagery in a poem). The language patterns of a text contribute to the distinctive nature of its overall organisation and shape its meaning.layoutThe spatial arrangement of print and graphics on a page or screen, including size of font, positioning of illustrations, inclusion of captions, labels, headings, bullet points, borders and text boxes.letter-sound relationshipAssociation between a sound in English and a letter or letter pattern in words. This assists in word recognition when reading (see graphophonic knowledge).lexical chainA sequence of related words in writing.lexical cohesionThe use of word associations to create links in texts. Examples of links are the use of repetition of words, pronouns, synonyms, antonyms and words that are related, for example, by class and subclass (see cohesion).linking devicesDevices that link words, phrases and sentences, often used interchangeably with conjunctions or text connectives.listeningThe use of the sense of hearing, as well as a range of active behaviours to comprehend information received through gesture, body language and other sensory systems (see active listening).literacyLiteracy involves students listening to, reading, viewing, speaking, writing and creating oral, print, visual and digital texts, and using and modifying language for different purposes in a range of contexts. It encompasses the knowledge and skills students need to access, understand, analyse and evaluate information, make meaning, express thoughts and emotions, present ideas and opinions, interact with others and participate in activities at school and beyond.literary devicesLiterary devices include textual elements such as structure, generic conventions, language forms and features that are used to shape meaning in texts; for example figurative language or soliloquy.literary textsPast and present texts across a range of cultural contexts that are valued for their form and style and are recognised as having enduring or artistic value.literatureLiterally means anything written, but the term is generally associated with works of imagination, fictional and non-fictional. It is often used to mean texts that are highly regarded examples of their forms and media.mass mediaTechnologies used to communicate information to large numbers of people over distances.mediaMeans of communication, for example print, digital. Plural of medium.memoryRecognition, retention, recall and learning. The term is used to describe spelling strategies that draw on 'known' or 'remembered' words. Memory may be:
? visual - recognising and recalling visual features, for example little and kettle have similar patterns
? auditory - recognising and recalling sound features by saying individual sounds and matching to letters in a word, including syllabification
? kinaesthetic - recognising and recalling by writing, for example Look, Cover, Write, Check
? tactile - recognising and recalling the feel of words
? articulatory - recognising and recalling the way the word is made in the mouth.metalanguageLanguage (which can include technical terms, concepts, ideas or codes) used to describe and discuss a language. The language of grammar and the language of literary criticism are two examples of metalanguage.metaphorA resemblance between one thing and another is declared by suggesting that one thing is another, for example 'My fingers are ice'. Metaphors are common in spoken and written language and visual metaphors are common in still images and moving images.metonymyThe use of the name of one thing or attribute of something to represent something larger or related, for example using the word 'crown' to represent a monarch of a country; referring to a place for an event as in 'Chernobyl' when referring to changed attitudes to nuclear power, or a time for an event as in '9/11' when referring to changed global relations.modal verbA verb that expresses a degree of probability attached by a speaker to a statement (for example 'I might come home') or a degree of obligation (for example 'You must give it to me').modalityAspects of language that suggest a particular perspective on events, a speaker or writer's assessment of possibility, probability, obligation, frequency and conditionality. Modality forms a continuum from high modality (for example obliged to, always, must) to low modality (for example might, could, perhaps, rarely). Modality is expressed linguistically in choices for modal verbs (for example can, may, must, should), modal adverbs (for example possibly, probably, certainly, perhaps), modal nouns (for example possibility, probability, certainty) and modal adjectives (for example likely, possible, certain).modeThe various processes of communication: listening, speaking, reading, writing, viewing and representing. Modes are also used to refer to the semiotic (meaning-making) resources associated with these communicative processes, for example sound, print, image and gesture (see language modes).mood? In literature, the emotive attitude or feeling carried by a particular text, for example happiness, excitement, doom. It has much in common with tone (see tone).
? Grammatically, a verb form conveying the speaker's attitude towards the subject. Traditionally classified as indicative (statements and questions), imperative (commands) or subjunctive (hypothetical or conditional). The subjunctive involves use of auxiliaries, for example could, may, should, might.morphemeThe smallest meaningful or grammatical unit in language. Morphemes are not necessarily the same as words. The word cat has one morpheme, while the word cats has two morphemes: cat for the animal and s to indicate that there is more than one. Similarly like has one morpheme, while dislike has two: like to describe appreciation and dis to indicate the opposite. Morphemes are very useful in helping students work out how to read and spell words.multimediaThose texts that use more than one medium, for example combining visual media, for example words and images, with sound. Television, the internet and developments in computer and digital technology have resulted in multimedia texts becoming increasingly rich and complex. Multimedia texts now generally feature moving images, sophisticated and complex graphics, and interactivity. Examples of multimedia texts include texts delivered on personal digital devices, music videos, cartoons, video games and internet texts.multimedialRelating to the use of a combination of media, including text, graphics, images, audio, video and hypertext.multimodalComprising more than one mode. A multimodal text uses a combination of two or more communication modes, for example print, image and spoken text as in film or computer presentations.mythsImportant stories that began in the early times of a culture and remained within that culture. They may be the basis of other pieces of literature.narrativeA story of events or experiences, real or imagined. Narrative includes the story (what is narrated) and the discourse (how and why it is narrated).
This includes the relationship between language, context and values represented through narrative. Narratology is a field of study that investigates the internal mechanisms of narrative.neologismThe creation of a new word or expression. Words which were neologisms quickly become mainstream, for example robot, email.nominalisationA process for forming nouns from verbs (for example reaction from react or departure from depart) or adjectives (for example length from long, eagerness from eager). Also a process for forming noun phrases from clauses (for example 'their destruction of the city' from 'they destroyed the city'). Nominalisation is often a feature of texts that contain abstract ideas and concepts.nounA word used to represent people, places, ideas and things.
? Nouns used to name any one of a class of things are known as common nouns, for example girl, classroom, egg.
? Nouns used to name a place, a person or the title of something are known as proper nouns. They are signalled by a capital letter, for example Sam, Wagga Wagga, Olympic Games.
? Nouns used to name a group of things are known as collective nouns, for example crowd, swarm, team.
? Nouns used to name things that we cannot see but which exist in thoughts and feelings are known as abstract nouns, for example sadness, love, wonder.
? Pronouns are words like I, you, them, hers that are used in place of a noun (see pronoun).noun groupsA group of words representing who or what is involved in the action or condition of the verb. Noun groups may occur in the place of the subject or the object of the verb. They can include different types of articles, adjectives and nouns linked together, for example 'The run-down old inner-city terrace house is for sale'. Noun groups can also include adjectival phrases and adjectival clauses, for example 'The house with the broken windows is for sale', 'The house that we saw yesterday is for sale'. A noun group can consist of two or more nouns, 'Boys and girls come out to play', 'Jenny, the oldest child, came into the room'.noun-pronoun agreementOccurs when a writer or speaker selects the correct pronoun for the noun or noun group to which it is referring, for example 'The boy was looking for his father in the supermarket'. There should be agreement in number and gender. In an effort to avoid sexist statements the plural their is sometimes used in place of his or her, without regard for the rules of agreement.numberA grammatical requirement for consistency between nouns, verbs and pronouns that must agree when they are referring to one (singular) or more (plural). If there is only one noun or pronoun in the subject, the verb must be singular and if there are more than one, the verb must be plural.objectThe noun, noun group or pronoun in a sentence that is affected by an action. To find the object ask who or what after the verb, for example 'The girl threw the ball'. (She threw what? Answer: the ball.)onomatopoeiaThe formation of a name or word by imitating the sound associated with the object designated.onset/rimeThe phonological units of a spoken syllable. A syllable can normally be divided into two parts: the onset which consists of the initial consonant or consonant blend and the rime which consists of the vowel and any final consonants. For example:
bark b (onset), ark (rime)
inside (no onset), in (rime), s (onset), ide (rime).parentheses ( )Punctuation markers used to enclose an explanatory word, phrase or sentence, an aside or a commentary, for example 'She was referring to her friend (Shirley) again'.parodyA work intended to ridicule or mock through imitating the ideas, tone, vocabulary and stylistic features of another work.passive voice(see voice)personThe relationship between a subject and its verb showing whether the subject is speaking about itself (first person - I or we), being spoken to (second person - you), or being spoken about (third person - he, she, it or they).personificationAttributing human characteristics to abstractions such as love, things (for example The trees sighed and moaned in the wind) or animals (for example The hen said to the fox...).perspectiveA way of regarding situations, facts and texts.persuasive text(see types of texts)phonemeThe smallest sound unit in a language that is capable of conveying a distinct meaning.phonemic awarenessThe awareness of sounds (phonemes) that make up spoken words. While phonemic awareness involves an understanding of the ways sounds function in words, it deals with only one aspect of sound: the phoneme.
Phonemic awareness is one aspect of phonological knowledge and is very important for learning to read and spell.phonicsThe understanding that there is a predictable relationship between the sounds of a spoken language and the letters and spellings that represent these sounds in written language.phonological knowledgeInformation about the sounds of language and letter-sound relationships (when comprehending text). It refers to the ability to recognise that words are made up of a variety of sound units, for example single sounds (phonemes) and blends. It includes the ability to:
? attend to and segment the sound stream into 'chunks' of sound known as syllables. Each syllable begins with a sound (onset) and ends with another sound (rime), eg:
- d-og onset and rime
- el-e-phant syllables
? know letter-sound relationships and how to use these to read words (including understanding of the blending process)
? understand that there is a systematic relationship between letters and sounds (the alphabetic principle).phraseA group of words that forms part of a sentence and does not include a finite verb (see finite verbs).
? Adjectival phrase - a group of words (usually beginning with a preposition) that gives more information about a noun, for example 'The girl with brown curly hair sat at the front', 'The flowers in the vase were wilting'.
? Adverbial phrase - a group of words that provides information about where, when, with what, how far, how long, with whom, about what, as what, for example 'She swept the floor with an old broom', 'Throughout time people have attempted to halt old age'.picture bookA book, traditionally produced for children and now also being composed for older readers, in which words and illustrations complement each other to tell a story that might have some allegorical, instructive or moral level of significance.poetic devicesParticular patterns and techniques of language used in poems to create particular effects based in the use of sound, the creation of images and other sensory inputs. Examples of these devices include metaphor, simile, metonymy, rhyme, rhythm, onomatopoeia, alliteration and assonance. Note that poetic devices may also be used in prose writing and drama scripts to obtain such effects.poetic formsFixed forms within poetry that must comply with certain requirements, for example ballad, sonnet, elegy, ode, dramatic monologue. The form will often be determined by the tone and subject matter. Note that some poets may deliberately subvert the fixed form (see subvert).point of view? The particular perspective brought by a composer, responder or character within a text to the text or to matters within the text.
? Narrative point of view refers to the ways a narrator may be related to the story. The narrator, for example, might take the role of first or third person, omniscient or restricted in knowledge of events, reliable or unreliable in interpretation of what happens.popular cultureCultural experiences, widely enjoyed by members of various groups within the community, that are popular within their own time, for example Shakespearean drama in Elizabethan England.positioningThe composing technique of causing the responder to adopt a particular point of view and interpret a text in a particular way. Composers position responders by selectively using detail or argument, by carefully shaping focus and emphasis and by choosing language that promotes a particular interpretation and reaction.predictable textTexts that are easily navigated and read by beginning readers because they contain highly regular features for example familiar subject matter, a high degree of repetition, consistent placement of text and illustrations, simple sentences, familiar vocabulary and a small number of sight words.predictionAn informed presumption about something that might happen. Predicting at the text level can include working out what a text might contain by looking at the cover, or working out what might happen next in a narrative. Predicting at the sentence level is identifying what word is likely to come next in a sentence. It is a useful technique when teaching reading or when engaging with a text dealing with matters not previously known.prefixA word part that is attached to the beginning of a base word to change the meaning or form, for example unhappy, dislike (see suffix).prepositionA word that begins an adverbial phrase or an adjectival phrase indicating time, place, manner, causality, for example in, on, after, before, by, under, over, of, through. Pronouns following prepositions always take objective case, for example 'between you and me' (not between you and I).prepositional phrasesUnits of meaning within a clause that begin with a preposition. They indicate how, when, where or why, for example 'She ran into the garden', 'He is available from nine o'clock'.pronounA word that is used in place of a noun. There are different types of pronouns:
? personal pronouns represent specific people or things, for example she, it, they, you, we
? demonstrative pronouns indicate a thing or things, for example this, these, that, those
? possessive pronouns refer to the belonging of one thing, person, etc, to another, for example his, theirs, yours, mine
? interrogative pronouns represent the things that we are asking questions about, for example who, whom, what, which
? reflexive pronouns refer back to the subject of the sentence or clause. Reflexive pronouns end in -self (singular) or -selves (plural). The reflexive pronoun myself is not a substitute for the personal pronouns I or me
? reciprocal pronouns are used when each of two or more subjects is acting in the same way towards the other, for example 'Jack and Jill love each other', 'The footballers were blaming one another'
? indefinite pronouns do not refer to any specific person, thing or amount, for example all, another, any, anybody/anyone, anything, each, everybody/everyone, everything, few, many, nobody, none, one, several, some, somebody/someone
? relative pronouns introduce a relative clause. They are called relative because they relate to the words they modify. There are five relative pronouns: who, whom, whose, which, that.pronunciationThe way in which a person speaks in terms of such aspects as articulation, rhythm (stress, pause), intonation (pitch, tone) and volume.punA figure of speech where there is a play on words. Puns are usually humorous and rely on more than one meaning of a word to emphasise the point, which may be serious.purposeThe purpose of a text, in very broad terms, is to entertain, to inform or to persuade different audiences in different contexts. Composers use a number of ways to achieve these purposes: persuading through emotive language, analysis or factual recount; entertaining through description, imaginative writing or humour, and so on.questionA sentence that seeks information. The word group normally tagged onto a clause in order to signal that a reply or response is required is known as a question tag, for example 'You are going tomorrow, aren't you?', 'Move over, can't you?'question mark (?)A punctuation marker used at the end of a sentence to indicate that a question is being asked.quotation marks ('...' or "...")Punctuation markers used to indicate:
? quoted or direct speech, for example 'I am Arno's brother,' he said. A new paragraph and separate quotation marks are used for each speaker being quoted
? in formal writing, the actual words quoted from another source. For example, Shakespeare is using dramatic irony when Lady Macbeth says, 'A little water clears us of this deed'
? the titles of poems, songs, short stories or articles, for example the well-known song, 'Waltzing Matilda'
? that attention is being drawn to an unusual or particular sense or usage of a word, for example Wombats are 'sociable' creatures.

Quotation marks are not used for the speech of characters in a drama script.quoted speech/direct speechSpeech in a text that quotes what someone has said, giving the exact words. It is represented in text by being contained within quotation marks (see reported speech).reading pathThe manner in which the eye of the viewer is led round an image, usually by drawing the viewer to the most salient or important elements in the composition.recountA type of text that records events in the sequence in which they occurred. The speaker/writer has often been personally involved in these events.re-creating textsTransforming texts to explore how changes in particular elements of a text affect meaning.referenceA means of keeping track of objects, words and illustrations in written and spoken texts. In spoken language the references may be to items in the surrounding environment. In written language the references are usually to words in the text or to illustrations or other graphical items.reference linksLinks that keep track of the people, animals or objects throughout a text - usually nouns or pronouns, for example 'Sam sailed the boat down the coast. He overturned it and he was towed to shore'.reference listA reference list is a list of texts cited within the work as appropriate to the medium and context of the work and in accordance to the principles of All My Own Work. reflectionThe thought process by which students develop an understanding and appreciation of their own learning. This process draws on both cognitive and affective experience.registerThe degree of formality or informality of language used for a particular purpose or in a particular social setting.reimagineReinterpret an event, work of art or a text imaginatively.related textsTexts that students have chosen in addition to their prescribed texts. The study of these related texts provides students with the opportunity to explore a wider variety of texts related to the particular module. Students draw their chosen texts from a variety of sources, in a range of genres and media.reported speech/indirect speechSpeech in a text used to communicate what someone else said, but without using the exact words. In reported speech the tense of the verbs is often changed, for example She said that she was going to leave (indirect speech), 'I am going to leave,' she said (direct speech).representationThe way ideas are portrayed and represented in texts, using language devices, forms, features and structures of texts to create specific views about characters, events and ideas. Representation applies to all language modes: spoken, written, visual and multimodal.representingThe language mode that involves composing images in visual or multimodal texts. These images and their meaning are composed using codes and conventions. The term can include such activities as graphically presenting the structure of a novel, making a film, composing a web page or enacting a dramatic text.responderA collective noun to include a reader, listener, viewer, an audience and so on.respondingThe activity that occurs when students read, listen to or view texts. It encompasses the personal and intellectual connections a student makes with texts. It also recognises that students and the texts to which they respond reflect social contexts. Responding typically involves:
? reading, listening and viewing that depend on, but go beyond, the decoding of texts
? identifying, comprehending, selecting, articulating, imagining, critically analysing and evaluating.rhetorical devicesStrategies used by writers and speakers to achieve particular effects, for example to stimulate the audience's imagination or thought processes, to draw attention to a particular idea, or simply to display wit and ingenuity in composition. Examples of rhetorical devices are irony, paradox, rhetorical question, contrast and appropriation.salienceA strategy of emphasis, highlighting what is important in a text. In images, salience is created through strategies like placement of an item in the foreground, size, and contrast in tone or colour. In writing, salience can occur through placing what is important at the beginning or at the end of a sentence or paragraph or through devices for example underlining or italics.satireThe use of one or more of exaggeration, humour, parody, irony, sarcasm or ridicule to expose, denounce and deride folly or vice in human nature and institutions. The emphatic feature of these language devices draws attention to what is being criticised.saturationThe depth of field or purity in colour or light.scanningWhen reading, moving the eyes quickly down the page seeking specific words and phrases.segmentTo separate or divide a word into sounds (phonemes). This can include segmenting words without pauses (stretching a word), for example mmmaaattt, and segmenting words with a pause between each unit of sound, for example / m / a / t /.semantic knowledge/informationSemantic information, and knowledge of it, is the broad, generalised knowledge of the world, of words and their meanings and word associations that allows responders to make sense of text beyond literal decoding and application of syntactic knowledge to text.semicolon (;)A punctuation marker used to indicate a separation between clauses that is stronger than a comma but less complete than a full stop. Semicolons may separate phrases or clauses that already include commas, for example 'The competition was not decided today; it will finish next week', 'Undo the outer wrapping, taking care not to damage the catch; remove the protective cover and open the box'. The clause after the semicolon must contain a finite verb and function as a stand-alone sentence.sentenceA unit of written language consisting of one or more clauses that are grammatically linked. A written sentence begins with a capital letter and ends with a full stop, question mark or exclamation mark. A sentence contains a finite verb. There are different types of sentences:
? simple sentence - is a single main clause and expresses a complete thought. It has a subject and a finite verb and may also have an object, for example 'Mary is beautiful.', 'The ground shook.', 'Take a seat.'
? compound sentence - contains two or more clauses that are coordinated or linked in such a way as to give each clause equal status. In the following example and is the coordinating conjunction: 'We went to the movies and bought an ice cream.'
? complex sentence - contains a main (or independent) clause and one or more subordinate (or dependent) clauses. The subordinate clause is joined to the main clause through subordinating conjunctions like when, while and before, as in the following examples: 'We all went outside when the sun came out.', 'Because I am reading a long book, my time is limited.'shotIn film or television, an uninterrupted image which can last for several seconds up to several minutes between two edits. The term also refers to the camera angle and/or position for example a close up, high angle or long shot.simileA figure of speech that compares two usually dissimilar things. The comparison starts with like, as or as if.skimmingThis strategy is used when reading to quickly identify the main ideas in a text.social distanceCulturally determined boundaries which suggest different relations between the represented participant and the viewer, for example intimate distance (close up), public distance (long shot).sound effectAny sound, other than speech or music, used to create a mood, feeling or response to a text such as film or drama.speakingUse voice to convey meaning and communicate with purpose. Some students participate in speaking activities using communication systems and assistive technologies to communicate wants and needs and to comment about the world.spoonerismA slip of the tongue where the initial sounds of a pair of words are transposed. Generally used for humour, for example 'a blushing crow'.Standard Australian EnglishEnglish which, in its spoken and written forms, is the English of more formal communication throughout the Australian community. Standard Australian English adheres to broadly accepted rules of syntax and pronunciation and uses vocabulary that is more formal than colloquial. Standard Australian English operates to facilitate communication across ethnic, social, occupational and cultural groups and can be used as a benchmark against which to recognise Australian dialects and cultural varieties of English. Standard Australian English is a valuable and empowering communicative tool for use in contexts where it is the preferred mode of communication.statementA sentence that provides information, for example 'I am leaving now', as contrasted with a question.stereotypeA circumstance where a person or thing is judged to be the same as all others of its type. Stereotypes are usually formulaic and oversimplified. In literature, a stereotype is a character representing generalised racial or social traits, with no individualisation.storyboardA series of drawings which approximate to a sequence of images used for planning a film text.structures of textsThe relationships of different parts of a text to each other and to the text as a complex whole. The structure of a text can refer to the internal organisation of ideas, as in an argument or story, the development of parallel plots in a novel or play, or the overarching framework of the text (see language forms and features and textual form).stylistic featuresThe ways aspects of texts, for example words, sentences and images, are arranged, and how they affect meaning. Style can distinguish the work of individual authors (for example Jennings' stories, Lawson's poems) as well as the work of a particular period (for example Elizabethan drama, nineteenth century novels). Examples of stylistic features are narrative viewpoint, structure of stanzas, juxtaposition, use of figurative language and tone.subjectAn element in the structure of a clause usually filled by a noun group, for example 'The dog (subject) was barking'. The subject indicates who or what gives agency or attributes to the finite verb or verb group and is usually found by asking 'who' or 'what' before the verb. In the sentence, 'The dog was barking', asking 'What was barking?' gives the answer, 'the dog'. The normal position of the subject is before the verb group, for example 'The dog was barking', but in most kinds of interrogatives (questions) it follows the first auxiliary verb, for example 'Was the dog barking?', 'Why was the dog barking?' All main clauses and simple sentences must have a subject.subject matterThe topic or content of a text, for example an information report on boats includes building materials, engines, etc. In literary texts, the subject matter is often different from the ideas of the text. For example, the subject matter of George Orwell's Animal Farm is animals running a farm, while the idea Orwell is exploring is totalitarianism.subject-verb agreementThe form of the verb must agree with the number of its subject, which will be a noun or noun group, for example 'They were not home' (as opposed to 'They was not home'). Confusion can arise when deciding whether the subject is singular or plural, for example 'This group of students is very clever', or when there are two subjects, for example 'Ice cream and strawberries are delicious' (not 'is delicious').subvertTo compose or respond to a text in ways that are different from the widely accepted reading or different from the conventional genre. For example, Roald Dahl's Revolting Rhymes provides a subverted reading of Cinderella. The purpose of producing a subverted reading of a text might be to entertain or to raise questions about the meaning or inherent values in the original text.suffixA word part that is attached to the end of a base word to change the meaning or form, for example jeweller, eating (see prefix).sustainedWhen referring to texts, maintaining consistency of style, form, language features, argument and other unifying characteristics across the entire text.syllabificationThe process of dividing words into syllables for reading and spelling purposes.syllableA unit of sound within a word containing a single vowel sound, for example won-der-ful, sing-ly.symbolAn object, animate or inanimate, which represents something else through the use of association, intentional analogy and convention.symbolismUse of a symbol that represents something else, particularly in relation to a quality or concept developed and strengthened through repetition. For example, freedom can be symbolised by a bird in flight in both verbal and visual texts.synonymA word or word group with the same or similar meaning as another word or word group, for example want (desire), go away (leave).syntacticRelated to the study of syntax.syntaxThe way in which sentences and clauses are structured. Syntax is often described in terms of such elements as subject, verb and object, for example 'Christine (subject) munched (verb) the apple (object)'.synthesiseCombine elements of language or ideas or parts of characters, and so on, to create more complex wholes.taxonomiesA particular classification arranged in a hierarchical structure. Taxonomies influence text structures, ordering ideas within a text.tenseThe element that determines when the action or condition of the verb form is located in time. In broad terms the tense will be past, present or future, for example 'Sarah laughed', 'Sarah laughs', 'Sarah will laugh'. Participles (verbs ending in -ing) do not locate a verb in time and need a finite component to indicate when the event happens. For example, the participle running needs the finite auxiliaries was running (past), is running (present), will be running (future) to indicate when the running occurred.term of addressA name or title used when addressing different people, for example Mum, Dr Singh, Johnno, Sir, darling.text connectivesOften called conjunctions, these are words for signposting the development of a text and helping it hold together. They can:
? sequence ideas, for example firstly, secondly, thirdly, finally
? add information, for example in addition, furthermore, in the same way
? show causes and results, for example so, therefore, for that reason, accordingly, as a consequence
? introduce conditions or concessions, for example on the other hand, however, nevertheless, despite this.text navigationThe way readers move through text. Readers generally read novels in a linear fashion from the beginning to the end. Readers of nonfiction books often use the contents page and index and move between chapters according to the information sought. Readers often read digital texts more flexibly, according to interest and purpose, using hyperlinks to move between pages and digital objects such as videos or animations, making quick judgements about the relevance of material.text processing strategiesStrategies for reading a text. These involve drawing on contextual, semantic, grammatical and phonic knowledge in systematic ways to work out what a text says. They include predicting, recognising words and working out unknown words, monitoring the reading, identifying and correcting errors, reading on and re-reading.text structureThe ways information is organised in different types of texts, for example chapter headings, subheadings, tables of contents, indexes and glossaries, overviews, introductory and concluding paragraphs, sequencing, topic sentences, taxonomies, cause and effect. Choices in text structures and language features together define a text type and shape its meaning (see language features).textsCommunications of meaning produced in any media that incorporates language, including sound, print, film, electronic and multimedia representations. Texts include written, spoken, non-verbal, visual or multimodal communications of meaning. They may be extended unified works, a series of related pieces or a single, simple piece of communication.textual formThe conventions specific to a particular type of text, often signalling content, purpose and audience, for example letter form, drama script, blog.textual integrityThe unity of a text; its coherent use of form and language to produce an integrated whole in terms of meaning and value.theme? Refers to the central or one of the main underlying ideas or messages of a text.
? Grammatical theme - in a sentence the theme is the clause that comes in first position and indicates what the sentence is about. Theme is important at different levels of text organisation. The topic sentence serves as the theme for the points raised in a paragraph. A pattern of themes contributes to the method of development for the text as a whole.theoretical perspectives and modelsTheoretical perspectives and models present significant views on the teaching of English. They incorporate different ways of considering texts to assist students to engage with the full scope of, and relationship between, meaning and texts. They include various teaching methods. Perspectives and models include 'personal growth', 'critical literacy', 'cultural heritage', 'cultural literacy' and the 'social view of language'.

Personal growth: an approach to teaching English that focuses on developing students' personal responses to texts, their enjoyment of reading, and fostering individual creativity. It is particularly concerned with students' social needs and personal interests and explicitly values students' own experiences. Through its exploration of personal experience and its acceptance of the language of everyday communication, a personal growth model allows for the incorporation of a wide range of texts and media. This approach allows for learning about self and the world through relation to text and context.

Critical literacy: the ability to question, challenge and evaluate the meanings and purposes of texts. It involves an understanding of the ways in which values and attitudes are communicated through language, including how subject matter, point of view and language embody assumptions about issues such as gender, ethnicity and class. A critical literacy approach to teaching English has students composing, responding to, analysing and evaluating written, spoken, visual and multimedia texts from various perspectives in order to learn how they operate as cultural products.

Cultural heritage: that approach to teaching that focuses on transmitting to students the established knowledge and values of high culture, expressed through literary texts. In the case of English teaching, a cultural heritage model places high value on the literature of the Western canon and involves detailed analytical treatment of texts in order to uncover the meanings intended and communicated by the author.

Cultural literacy: knowledge and understanding of texts as cultural artefacts and how language, history, values and traditions shape and are reflected in literature, the media, popular culture and everyday and workplace contexts. Cultural literacy requires an ability to respond to and compose texts with an awareness of such cultural contexts.

Social view of language: an approach to literacy education that recognises that acts of communication (texts) are socially constructed. Texts vary according to different situations and cultural factors. The effectiveness of a text is judged according to how well it fulfils its social, personal or academic purpose.tone? The voice adopted by a particular speaker to indicate emotion, feeling or attitude to subject matter.
? The author's attitude towards the subject and audience, for example playful, serious, ironic, formal.types of textsClassifications according to the particular purposes texts are designed to achieve. These purposes influence the characteristic features the texts employ. In general, texts can be classified as belonging to one of three types (imaginative, informative or persuasive), although it is acknowledged that these distinctions are neither static nor watertight and particular texts can belong to more than one category.
? Imaginative texts - texts that represent ideas, feelings and mental images in words or visual images. An imaginative text might use metaphor to translate ideas and feelings into a form that can be communicated effectively to an audience. Imaginative texts also make new connections between established ideas or widely recognised experiences in order to create new ideas and images. Imaginative texts are characterised by originality, freshness and insight. These texts include novels, traditional tales, poetry, stories, plays, fiction for young adults and children, including picture books and multimodal texts, for example film.
? Informative texts - texts whose primary purpose is to provide information through explanation, description, argument, analysis, ordering and presentation of evidence and procedures. These texts include reports, explanations and descriptions of natural phenomena, recounts of events, instructions and directions, rules and laws, news bulletins and articles, websites and text analyses. They include texts which are valued for their informative content, as a store of knowledge and for their value as part of everyday life.
? Persuasive texts - texts whose primary purpose is to put forward a point of view and persuade a reader, viewer or listener. They form a significant part of modern communication in both print and digital environments. Persuasive texts seek to convince the responder of the strength of an argument or point of view through information, judicious use of evidence, construction of argument, critical analysis and the use of rhetorical, figurative and emotive language. They include student essays, debates, arguments, discussions, polemics, advertising, propaganda, influential essays and articles. Persuasive texts may be written, spoken, visual or multimodal.upper and lower caseUpper case (also called capital letters) and lower case letters are two forms of the letters of the alphabet. Lower case letters are used except when it is necessary to:
? indicate specific names, for example those of organisations, titles, countries
? indicate the beginning of a sentence or the initial letter of a proper noun.value systemsThe set of personal, social and cultural beliefs that underpin a text. For example, in the western genre a clear line is drawn between good and evil and great value is placed on rugged masculine individualism as a means of keeping order.valuesThese are the ideas and beliefs in a text. They may be reflected in characters, through what they do and say; through the setting of the text, reflecting particular social views; and through the narrative voice of the text, perhaps through authorial comment. Values are specific to individuals and groups, and a text may contain a number of conflicting values.vectorAn item that directs our eyes towards a focal point, for example when the subject in a visual text is pointing or looking in a certain direction. As the reader or viewer, our eyes will follow the direction in which they are pointing or looking.verbThe verb is perhaps the most important part of the sentence. A verb states what is happening in the sentence. Finite verbs locate the condition or action of the verb in a specific time frame: past, present or future (see finite verbs and tense). Verbs create the relationship between the subject and the object of the verb (see subject-verb agreement). Different types of verbs include:
? action verbs, for example 'They danced all night.'
? relating verbs, for example 'Cows are herbivores.'
? thinking verbs, for example 'She forgot his name.'
? feeling verbs, for example 'Sarah likes baked beans.'
? possessing verbs, for example 'He has a new car.'verb groupsA group of words built up around a verb. Verb groups may include auxiliary verbs (ie those 'helping' verbs used to indicate tense or modality), for example 'She is going soon', 'They must leave before dark'. Verb groups can contain two or more verbs, for example 'He huffed and puffed', 'They were going to climb the fence'. These are sometimes called complex/compound verbs. Some verb groups include other words such as adverbs and prepositions, for example 'The plane took off' (see auxiliary verb).viewingObserving and comprehending a visual text, for example diagram, illustration, photograph, film, television documentary, multimedia. This sometimes involves listening to and reading accompanying written text.visual featuresVisual components of a text for example placement, salience, framing, representation of action or reaction, shot size, social distance and camera angle.visual languageLanguage that contributes to the meaning of an image or the visual components of a multimodal text and are selected from a range of visual features like placement, salience, framing, representation of action or reaction, shot size, social distance and camera angle. Visual language can also include elements, for example symbol, colour, scene and frame composition, setting and landscape, lighting and the use of editing.visual literacyThe ability to decode, interpret, create, question, challenge and evaluate texts that communicate with visual images as well as, or rather than, words. Visually literate people can read the intended meaning in a visual text such as an advertisement or a film shot, interpret the purpose and intended meaning, and evaluate the form, structure and features of the text. They can also use images in a creative and appropriate way to express meaning.visual memoryThe retention, recall or recognition of things seen. In reading and writing, visual memory is helpful in learning letter forms and their sequence in words.visual processingThe reader's reaction to the visual features or appearance of written text. This is influenced by the reader's familiarity with letter strings and multi-letter patterns (see graphological).visual textsTexts in which meaning is shaped and communicated by images rather than words. Visual texts use techniques, for example line, shape, space, colour, movement, perspective, angle and juxtaposition to shape meaning. Examples of visual texts include cartoons, billboards, photographs, film, TV, artworks, web pages and illustrations.voice? In reference to a text, voice means the composer's voice - the idea of a speaking consciousness, the controlling presence or 'authorial voice' behind the characters, narrators and personas in a text. It is also described as the implied composer. The particular qualities of the composer's voice are manifested by such things as her or his method of expression (for example an ironic narrator) and specific language.
? Grammatically, voice refers to the way of indicating who is doing the action. Active voice is where the 'doer' of the action comes before the verb, for example 'Ann broke the vase'. Passive voice is where the 'receiver' of the action is placed before the verb, for example 'The vase was broken by Ann' (see theme). Stylistically, active voice is usually preferred in writing, as it places the agent of the verb at the start of the sentence and has a sense of immediacy, whereas passive voice creates a sense of detachment between subject and verb and is not so easily read and understood.
? In speaking, a description of the oral production of text.voice-overThe voice of an unseen commentator or narrator heard during a film or presentation.word chainA sequence of nouns and noun groups or verbs and verb groups that unifies a text by linking a particular content strand. Chains can also be established through repetition. For example, in a text about birds, words such as pelicans, blue cranes, moorhens and ibises create a word chain based on a pattern of words connecting classes of items.word originThe source and history of a word (etymology), for example photograph (from the Greek words for 'light' and 'picture').word playExperimenting with and manipulating language (often in humour), usually for entertaining effect, for example spoonerisms, double meanings, puns.writingPlan, compose, edit and publish texts in print or digital forms. Writing usually involves activities using pencils, pens, word processors; and/or using drawings, models, photos to represent text; and/or using a scribe to record responses or produce recorded responses.youth culturesThe shared beliefs, knowledge, creative activities, customs and lifestyle of young people, particularly teenagers, within a culture. Youth cultures develop in those societies which differentiate teenagers as a group separate from children and adults. In Australia, the dominant youth culture identifies closely with popular culture and finds expression in the music and multimedia texts of popular culture.

English Standard Stage 6 Syllabus	77

Year 11

Year 12



