NSW Education Standards AuthoritySoftware Engineering 11-12 (2022)
Syllabus Support
curriculum.nsw.edu.au
Generated Dec 2025

Downloaded December 2025
(c) 2025 NSW Education Standards Authority 
NESA acknowledges Traditional Owners and Custodians of Country throughout NSW, and pays respect to Elders past and present. NESA recognises Aboriginal Peoples' continuing Cultures and Connections to lands, waters, skies and Community.
The documents on the NSW Education Standards Authority (NESA) website and the NSW Curriculum website contain material prepared by NESA for and on behalf of the Crown in right of the State of New South Wales. The material is protected by Crown copyright. 
These websites hold the only official and up-to-date versions of the documents available on the internet. Any other copies of these documents, or parts of these documents, that may be found elsewhere on the internet might not be current and are not authorised. You cannot rely on copies from any other source. 
All rights are reserved. No part of the material may be: 
* reproduced in Australia or in any other country by any process, electronic or otherwise, in any material form 
* transmitted to any other person or stored electronically in any form without the written permission of NESA except as permitted by the Copyright Act 1968 (Cth). 
When you access the material, you agree: 
* to use the material for research or study, criticism or review, reporting news and parody or satire 
* to use the material for information purposes only 
* not to modify the material or any part of the material without the written permission of NESA 
* to reproduce a single copy for personal bona fide study use only and not to reproduce any major extract or the entire material without the permission of NESA 
* to include this copyright notice in any copy made 
* to acknowledge that NESA is the source of the material. 
The documents may include third-party copyright material such as photos, diagrams, quotations, cartoons and artworks. This material is protected by Australian and international copyright laws and may not be reproduced or transmitted in any format without the copyright owner's permission. Unauthorised reproduction, transmission or commercial use of such copyright material may result in prosecution. 
NESA has made all reasonable attempts to locate the owners of third-party copyright material. NESA invites anyone from whom permission has not been sought to contact the Copyright Officer.
Special arrangements applying to the NSW Curriculum Reform 
As part of the NSW Curriculum Reform process, NESA grants a limited non-exclusive licence to: 
* teachers employed in NSW government schools and registered non-government schools 
* representatives from peak school education bodies, such as the NSW Department of Education, Catholic Schools NSW, the Association of Independent Schools of NSW and TAFE NSW
* parents of children registered for home schooling 
to use, modify and adapt the NSW syllabuses for non-commercial educational use only. The adaptation must not have the effect of bringing NESA into disrepute. 
Note: The above arrangements do not apply to private/home tutoring companies, professional learning service providers, publishers, and other organisations.
For more information on the above or for commercial use or any other purpose, please contact the Copyright Officer for permission. 
Email: copyright@nesa.nsw.edu.au
Table of contents
Table of contents	4
Software Engineering 11-12 (2022)	5
Teaching advice for Stage 6	5
Teaching advice for Programming fundamentals	5
Teaching advice for The object-oriented paradigm	6
Teaching advice for Programming mechatronics	7
Teaching advice for Secure software architecture	8
Teaching advice for Programming for the Web	9
Teaching advice for Software automation	10
Teaching advice for Software engineering project	11
Glossary	12
Software Engineering 11-12 (2022) Terms	12
Global Terms	16

Software Engineering 11-12 (2022)
Teaching advice for Stage 6
Teaching advice for Programming fundamentals
Content
* Programming fundamentals
Teaching advice
The teaching advice below provides an overview of each focus area in Year 11 and includes advice regarding the practical application of the content through project work.
Why is it important?
The Programming Fundamentals focus area provides opportunities for students to develop foundational knowledge and understanding of software programming. Students develop skills to design algorithms, learn about standard control structures and how to apply and evaluate them in the design of software. This focus area enables students to develop an understanding of how to use algorithms to develop code that processes data to perform an action. Students will need to abstract both data and procedures when they apply computational thinking to a problem.
Project work advice
Students are introduced to software engineering by applying computational thinking to develop a program. In this focus area students apply core knowledge and skills to develop project(s) that incorporate standard algorithmic structures converted into programming code. Projects could include the conversion of a standard board game into a computer game, designing a memory game, maze or arcade-style video game.

Teaching advice for The object-oriented paradigm
Content
* The object-oriented paradigm
Teaching advice
The teaching advice below provides an overview of each focus area in Year 11 and includes advice regarding the practical application of the content through project work.
Why is it important?
The Object-Oriented Paradigm focus area provides opportunities for students to apply an object-oriented programming (OOP) language to solve problems. Students extend their knowledge of code development to include strategic and logical analysis as they design and implement code with an OOP focus. They develop an understanding of encapsulation, inheritance and polymorphism. This focus area emphasises the importance of implementing an appropriate design process to ensure the success, accuracy and efficiency of computer programs.
Project work advice
Students exercise the fundamental skills developed in the Programming Fundamentals focus area and apply these to the specific requirements of OOP languages. Students apply core knowledge and skills to develop project(s) that apply the intricate skills associated with designing and programming using OOP. Projects could include a quiz-based application, stopwatch and alarm clock, a bulk file renaming tool, a simple graphic user interface (GUI) or application programming interface (API).

Teaching advice for Programming mechatronics 
Content
* Programming mechatronics
Teaching advice
The teaching advice below provides an overview of each focus area in Year 11 and includes advice regarding the practical application of the content through project work.
Why is it important?
The Programming Mechatronics focus area provides opportunities for students to study a diverse range of mechatronic-based systems and the software that is used to control them. Students explore the design, automation and operational performance of mechatronic systems. This focus area familiarises students with approaches to design and implement code that is modular, reusable, reliable and maintainable. Students use computational thinking and design thinking to build and program a mechatronic system that uses sensors, actuators and end effectors.
Project work advice
Students extend the learning experienced through the Programming Fundamentals and Object-Oriented Paradigm focus areas to develop project(s) by building and programming a mechatronic system using a range of sensors, actuators and end effectors. Projects explore the use and application of robotics, controllers and the programming of these devices using a text-based, OOP language.

Teaching advice for Secure software architecture
Content
* Secure software architecture
Teaching advice
The teaching advice provides an overview of each focus area in Year 12 and additional advice regarding the planning and delivery of the content to maximise student synthesis.
Why is it important?
The Secure Software Architecture focus area provides opportunities for students to develop knowledge, understanding and skills associated with developing secure software. Students investigate and practise industry-recognised techniques for developing secure programming code and how these techniques contribute to the development of secure software. This focus area provides opportunities to evaluate the social, ethical and legal issues that affect people and enterprises resulting from the development and implementation of safe and secure software.
Additional advice
This focus area may be studied independently or combined with the Programming for the Web topic to support the consolidation of key concepts experienced by software development engineers.

Teaching advice for Programming for the Web
Content
* Programming for the web
Teaching advice
The teaching advice provides an overview of each focus area in Year 12 and additional advice regarding the planning and delivery of the content to maximise student synthesis.
Why is it important?
The Programming for the Web focus area encourages students to extend their knowledge and understanding of how algorithms support the development of efficient and accurate computer programs. Students learn about the software engineering principles that guide the development of software used to control hardware responsible for the transmission of data in web environments. This focus area provides opportunities to develop computational and systems thinking as students apply software engineering principles to design and develop web-based applications.
Additional advice
This focus area may be studied independently or combined with the Secure Software Architecture topic to consolidate and practise key concepts experienced by software development engineers.

Teaching advice for Software automation
Content
* Software automation
Teaching advice
The teaching advice provides an overview of each focus area in Year 12 and additional advice regarding the planning and delivery of the content to maximise student synthesis.
Why is it important?
The Software Automation focus area provides opportunities for students to extend their knowledge and understanding of programming and its diverse applications. Students are provided with opportunities to design and implement code as they apply object-oriented programming knowledge and design thinking to solve problems. Learning in this focus area emphasises the fields of machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI). This includes some of the fundamental knowledge and skills required to program for emerging technologies and the significance and impact of ML and AI on the individual, society and the environment.
Additional advice
The practical learning experiences should apply the skills associated with developing and evaluating the success of ML systems and the code that drives them. This highlights opportunities for students to incorporate software automation into their Software Engineering project.

Teaching advice for Software engineering project
Content
* Software engineering project
Teaching advice
The teaching advice provides an overview of each focus area in Year 12 and additional advice regarding the planning and delivery of the content to maximise student synthesis.
Why is it important?
The Software Engineering Project is to be completed in Year 12 and will require students to develop a project of their choice based on the knowledge and skills developed in Year 11 and Year 12.
Students have an opportunity to develop deeper knowledge, understanding and skills in an area of interest as they engage in a software engineering project that addresses an identified real-world problem. Students refine and apply project-management skills as they develop, document, implement and evaluate their project solution. Learning in this focus area emphasises project-management and software development approaches, explores the tools used by software designers and engineers, and explores the concept of delivering solutions for a client. Highly valued industry skills such as collaboration and communication are developed through project work where students consider involving and empowering clients, responding to stakeholders, and negotiating with peers.
Teachers are encouraged to integrate the learning content of this focus area within all other Year 12 focus areas.

Glossary
Software Engineering 11-12 (2022) Terms
algorithm
A step-by-step procedure required to solve a problem. Algorithms may be presented in many ways, e.g. written instructions, flow charts or using a computer programming language.
app
A software program designed for a specific purpose to run on mobile devices or on a personal computer. An abbreviation of the word 'application'.
application programming interface (API)
An interface that allows an application or website to plug into another program or website.
artificial intelligence (AI)
Intelligence demonstrated by machines. Sometimes called machine intelligence.
assets
Assets are the digital elements that can be used or incorporated into a multimedia presentation or production. They include graphics, photographs, videos, audio, animations or other artistic data.
big data
Extremely large datasets that may be analysed computationally to reveal patterns, trends and associations.
black box testing
A testing technique where there is no knowledge of the internal workings of an application. A user will provide inputs and observe the outputs in order to determine functionality of the program.
collaborate
Working with others towards a shared goal, through a variety of modes of communication. This may be achieved using a range of technologies, tools and processes.
computational thinking
A process in which a problem is analysed and solved so that a human, machine or computer can effectively implement the solution. It involves using strategies to organise data logically, break down problems into parts, interpret patterns and design, and implement algorithms to solve problems.
data
A discrete representation of information using number codes. Data may include characters (e.g. alphabetic letters, numbers and symbols), images, sounds and/or instructions that, when represented by number codes, can be manipulated, stored and communicated by digital systems. For example, characters may be represented using ASCII code or images may be represented by a bitmap of numbers representing each 'dot' or pixel.
data sovereignty
This is a global movement that refers to the right of Indigenous Peoples to determine the creation, collection, ownership and application of data that is for and about Indigenous Peoples. The term also refers to transnational data flow and a range of issues arising from the flow of data between nations.
data types
Data types used in computing are expressed as either:
* string/text
* character
* integer
* floating point or real
* date and time
* Boolean.
design thinking
A process where a need or opportunity is identified and a design solution is developed. The consideration of economic, environmental and social impacts that result from designed solutions are core to design thinking. Design thinking methods can be used when trying to understand a problem, generate ideas and refine a design based on evaluation and testing.
digital technologies
Refers to electronic tools, systems, devices and resources that generate, process or store data, and may include applications, games, microcontrollers, mobile devices, multimedia, networks, robotics.
evaluate
Make a judgement based on criteria; determine the value of.
grey box testing
A testing technique where there is a partial knowledge of the internal workings of an application. Its purpose is to search for defects related to improper code structure or the improper use of functions. This technique gives the ability to test both the code and the presentation layer of an application.
Note: grey box testing and gray box testing mean the same.
information
The presentation of data in a manner that is readily understood.
information system
The combination of digital systems, people and processes that collect, manage and analyse data.
model
A mathematical, conceptual or physical representation that describes, simplifies, clarifies or provides an explanation of the structure, workings or relationships within an object, system or idea. Models can provide a means of testing and predicting behaviour within limited conditions. Models may be physical or exist in digital form.
object-oriented programming (OOP)
A paradigm based on the concept of 'objects' that can contain data and code in the form of procedures. OOP language is a language based on the principles of 'C'.
Object-Relational Mapping (ORM)
A technique used in object-oriented programming to query and manipulate data from a database.
procedural programming
A method of programming where the program is divided into functions. A program consists of data and procedures (modules) that operate on the data. Data and procedures are treated as separate entities.
prototype
A trial product or model built to test an idea or process to inform further design development. Its purpose is to see if and how well the design works and is tested by users and systems analysts. A prototype can be either a physical object or exist in digital form.
See model
pseudocode
A form of algorithm description that uses English-like statements with defined rules of structure and keywords.
refinement charts
A diagrammatic model that breaks down the steps of an outline solution into smaller and smaller steps.
scripting language
A programming language designed for integrating and communicating with other programming languages.
structured data
Data with a high degree of organisation, such that it can easily be analysed and processed using algorithms. The organisation of the data takes on a form that captures the properties and behaviours of the source the data represents.
structured query language (SQL)
Specialist programming language used to manage data and access data in relational database management systems.
systems thinking
An understanding of how related objects or components interact to influence how systems function. Students are provided with opportunities to recognise the connectedness of, and interactions between phenomena, people, places and events in local and wider contexts and consider the impact of their decisions. Understanding the complexity of systems and the interdependence of components is important for scientific research and for the creation of solutions to technical, economic and social issues.
user experience (UX)
The usability, ease of use, and enjoyment provided in the interaction between the customer and the product.
user interface (UI)
The means by which users interact with computer hardware or software. In software, this usually comprises fields for text and number entry, mouse pointers, buttons and other graphical elements. In hardware, switches, dials and light-emitting diodes (LEDs) provide information about the interactions between a user and a machine.
W3C
The World Wide Web Consortium is the international standards organisation for the world wide web. All of the standards used for web development are defined by this organisation.
white box testing
A testing technique used to examine the internal workings of an application including the design, code and inner workings of software. This technique gives the ability to verify the flow of inputs and outputs through the application.

Global Terms
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
Aboriginal Peoples are the first peoples of Australia and are represented by more than 250 language groups, each associated with a particular Country or territory. Torres Strait Islander Peoples are represented by 5 major island groups, and are associated with island territories to the north of Australia's Cape York which were annexed by Queensland in 1879. 
An Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander person is someone who: 
* is of Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander descent 
* identifies as an Aboriginal person and/or Torres Strait Islander person, and 
* is accepted as such by the Aboriginal and/or Torres Strait Islander community(ies) in which they live.
Aboriginal English
A recognised dialect of English which is the first, or home language, of many Aboriginal people. It differs from other dialects of English, such as Standard Australian English, in systematic ways including sounds, grammar, words and their meanings, and language use. Aboriginal English is a powerful vehicle for the expression of Aboriginal identity. Aboriginal English is not a target language study option for NSW Aboriginal Languages syllabuses.
Aboriginal Songline(s)
Texts that describe landscapes and directions of the tracks forged in lands, waters and skies by Creator Spirits during the Dreaming.
accessibility
The extent to which a system, environment or object may be used irrespective of a user's capabilities or abilities. For example, the use of assistive technologies (AT) to allow people with disability to use computer systems, or the use of icons in place of words to allow young children to use a system.
assistive technology (AT)
A device or system whose primary purpose is to maintain or improve an individual's functioning and independence to facilitate participation and enhance overall wellbeing. This includes technologies specifically designed to meet an individual's needs, eg eye gaze technology, as well as more general technologies that can be used by anyone, eg speech-to-text applications. Assistive technology can also be referred to as inclusive technology.
augmentative and alternative communication (AAC)
An umbrella term that encompasses the communication methods used to supplement or replace speech or writing. AAC can be unaided, such as gestures, body language and sign language, or aided such as pictures, symbols, objects or speech generating devices.
See communication systems
communication forms
The ways people communicate and the communicative behaviours they use. Communication forms can be non-symbolic and/or symbolic. Non-symbolic forms include sounds, gestures, facial expressions and eye movements. Symbolic forms can be aided or non-aided. Aided forms of symbolic communication include objects, symbols, photographs and drawings. Aided forms can be digital. Non-aided forms of symbolic communication include formal gestures; speech; and signs, such as Key Word Sign.
copyright
The protection provided to the creators of original works and makers of sound recordings and films, that offers a legal framework for the control and reproduction or transmission of their literary, dramatic, artistic or musical works.
Country/Place
Country is used to describe a specific area of a nation or clan including physical, linguistic and spiritual features. Aboriginal communities' cultural associations with their Country may include or relate to languages, cultural practices, knowledge, songs, stories, art, paths, landforms, flora, fauna and minerals. These cultural associations may include custodial relationships with particular landscapes such as land, sea, sky, rivers as well as the intangible places associated with the Dreaming(s). Custodial relationships are extremely important in determining who may have the capacity to authentically speak for their Country. 
Place is a space mapped out by physical or intangible boundaries that individuals or groups of Torres Strait Islander Peoples occupy and regard as their own. It is a space with varying degrees of spirituality.
culture
The customs, habits, beliefs/spirituality, social organisation and ways of life that characterise different groups and communities. Cultural characteristics give a group or individual a sense of who they are and help them make sense of the world in which they live. Culture is a shared system but inherently diverse - there can be individual and group differences within cultures. Everyone has culture - it is a lens through which we see the world.
custodians
In Aboriginal communities, an individual charged with maintaining and passing on particular elements of cultural significance, eg language, stories, songs, rituals and imagery.
See owners
d/Deaf
When referring to deaf people who belong to a linguistic and cultural minority known as the Deaf community, the 'D' may be capitalised in reference to the individual, the group, or the culture in order to accord respect and deference, for example, the Deaf community. When referring simply to audiological status or when cultural affiliation is not known, as in the case of a person with a hearing loss in general, the lowercase 'd', as in 'deaf' is the more common usage.
Deaf
A cultural identity for people with hearing loss who share a common culture and who usually have a shared sign language.
disability
An umbrella term for any or all of the following components: 
* impairments: challenges in body function or structure
* activity limitations: difficulties in executing activities
* participation restrictions: challenges an individual may experience in involvement in life situations. (World Health Organization)
diversity
Differences that exist within a group, for example, age, sex, gender, gender expression, sexuality, ethnicity, ability/disability, body shape and composition, culture, religion/spirituality, learning differences, socioeconomic background, values and experiences.
Dreaming
The Dreaming has different meanings for different Aboriginal groups. The Dreaming can be seen as the embodiment of Aboriginal creation which gives meaning to everything; the essence of Aboriginal beliefs about creation and spiritual and physical existence. It establishes the rules governing relationships between the people, the land and all things for Aboriginal Peoples. The Dreaming is linked to the past, the present and the future. Where appropriate, refer to Aboriginal names for the Dreaming.
Elders
The custodians of knowledge and lore. They are chosen and accepted by their own communities as people who have the permission to disclose cultural knowledge and beliefs. Recognised Elders are highly respected people within Aboriginal communities. Proper consultation with local Aboriginal communities will often direct schools to recognised Elders.
first language(s)
The first language(s) that a person learns to speak.
Indigenous
An internationally recognised term for the first peoples of a land. In NSW the term Aboriginal person/Peoples is preferred.
See Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples
Indigenous cultural and intellectual property (ICIP)
Includes, but is not limited to, objects, sites, cultural knowledge, cultural expression and the arts, that have been transmitted or continue to be transmitted through generations as belonging to a particular Indigenous group or Indigenous people as a whole or their territory. 
See intellectual property
intellectual property
Non-material assets such as forms of cultural expression that belong to a particular individual or community. Intellectual property rights refer to the rights that the law grants to individuals for the protection of creative, intellectual, scientific and industrial activity, such as inventions. 
See Indigenous cultural and intellectual property (ICIP), and copyright
Key Word Sign
A communication strategy that incorporates signing with speech. It is used to support language development for people with communication difficulties. Although Key Word Sign uses a simplified form of manual signing, it is different to Auslan, as it is not a signed language.
kinship
A key aspect of Aboriginal cultures and values. It includes the importance of all relationships and of being related to and belonging to the land.
language group
An Aboriginal community identified with a common language, both verbal and nonverbal, and with a particular territory. Used in preference to the term 'tribe'.
language revival
The process and range of strategies for increasing knowledge and use of a language that is no longer spoken fluently across all generations in the context of language loss or language dispossession caused by colonisation. Aboriginal Languages and Torres Strait Islander Languages are being revived through community initiatives, linguistic research and school programs. 'Language revival' may be used as an overarching term that could also include 'reclamation', 'revitalisation', 'renewal' and 'reawakening'.
local Aboriginal community
A local Aboriginal community is constituted by those people who are Aboriginal and who reside in the near locality. Aboriginal communities will have a rich and diverse history that has been seriously affected by dispossession and relations, which sees families with spiritual connection to Country residing beside those who have been forced to move from other locations. The notion of locality is complex and multilayered: schools should seek advice from a range of people and/or organisations representing local interests. 
See community(ies)
off-Country
Taking place away from Aboriginal land or Country of origin. 
See Country/Place
on-Country
Taking place on Aboriginal land or Country of origin.
See Country/Place
owners
Each Aboriginal Language is recognised as belonging to a particular geographical area and thus to the people who can claim a connection to that area. Aboriginal community members acquire ownership of their language(s) at birth. Language proficiency is not essential for ownership.
See custodians
protocols
The appropriate ways of behaving, communicating and showing respect for diversity of history and culture. This involves appreciation of the knowledge, standing and status of people within the local Aboriginal community and the school community. Protocols inevitably vary between communities, and between people within a community. In establishing a partnership between schools and Aboriginal communities, it is especially important that protocols are acknowledged and respected.
respect
A term used commonly in NSW Aboriginal communities to refer to the way an individual treats others. Showing respect occurs in many ways, such as waiting to speak, listening and demonstrating understanding, not asking too many direct questions, ensuring that people are not made to feel uncomfortable or uneasy, and generally showing regard for others' ideas, beliefs and culture.
sign
Hand signs (or hand talk) used to supplement or replace oral language. Signs form part of nonverbal communication for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples and may be used by people who are hearing, or d/Deaf or hard of hearing. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Sign Languages may be used in some areas. Some Sign Languages may be associated with sacred ceremonial practices.
signage
The use of words, graphic designs and/or symbols used to communicate a message, eg information signs, plaques, warning signs, road signs, signs that show direction.
switch
A type of assistive technology that enables people with cognitive and/or physical disability to access a range of devices, including computers and communication devices. Switches can be activated by touch, or triggered without contact, such as through eye gaze, sound or blowing.
See assistive technology (AT)
yarning circle
Yarning circles are an important cultural practice for Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples to learn within the collective group. Knowledge and information are shared in harmony and respect with all individuals.

Software Engineering 11-12 (2022)	Page 20 of 20

