=== Module 6: Electromagnetism ===
Subject: physics
============================================================

ElectromagnetismModule 7 
The Nature of Light60Module 8 
From the Universe to the Atom
*15 hours must be allocated to depth studies within the 120 indicative course hours.
Requirements for Practical Investigations
Scientific investigations include both practical investigations and secondary-sourced investigations. Practical investigations are an essential part of the Year 12 course and must occupy a minimum of 35 hours of course time, including time allocated to practical investigations in depth studies.

Practical investigations include:
? undertaking laboratory experiments, including the use of appropriate digital technologies
? fieldwork.

Secondary-sourced investigations include:
? locating and accessing a wide range of secondary data and/or information
? using and reorganising secondary data and/or information.


Assessment and Reporting
Information about assessment in relation to the Physics syllabus is contained in Assessment and Reporting in Physics Stage 6. It outlines course-specific advice and requirements regarding:
? Year 11 and Year 12 school-based assessment requirements
? Year 11 and Year 12 mandatory components and weightings
? External assessment requirements including HSC examination specifications.

This information should be read in conjunction with requirements on the Assessment Certification Examination (ACE) website.

Additional advice is available in the Principles of Assessment for Stage 6.


Content
Content defines what students are expected to know and do as they work towards syllabus outcomes. It provides the foundations for students to successfully progress to the next stage of schooling or post-school opportunities.
Teachers will make decisions about content regarding the sequence, emphasis and any adjustments required based on the needs, interests, abilities and prior learning of students.
Content in Stage 6 syllabuses defines learning expectations that may be assessed in Higher School Certificate examinations.


Organisation of Content
The following diagram provides an illustrative representation of elements of the course and their relationship.

The Year 11 and Year 12 courses each comprise four modules. The skills of Working Scientifically are integrated as course content throughout the syllabus. Each module includes a specific focus on some of the Working Scientifically skills. However, there is scope within each module to engage with all of the Working Scientifically skills.



The Working Scientifically outcomes and content are integrated into each module wherever students undertake an investigation.


Working Scientifically
Working Scientifically skills are at the core of conducting practical and secondary-sourced investigations in science.

Opportunities should be provided for students to engage with all the Working Scientifically skills in investigations. In each module, particular outcomes have been identified as those that are most relevant to the intended learning.

Students are challenged to further develop their understanding of Working Scientifically as a group of dynamic and interdependent processes that are applied in each scientific investigation in a way that is appropriate and determined by the activity. This dynamism and interrelatedness adds a level of sophistication to students' understanding of the true nature and practice of science. Through regular involvement in these processes, applying them as appropriate, in a range of varied practical investigations; students can broaden their interpretation of Working Scientifically beyond the common linear model.

Students are encouraged to select the most appropriate gateway to the Working Scientifically processes. The pathways within the processes become self-evident through the nature of the investigation. An investigation may be instigated by, for example:
? direct observation of a phenomenon
? inconsistencies arising from results of a related investigation 
? the quantitative and qualitative analysis of data 
? secondary-sourced research.

Students are challenged to be open to: 
? refining or redeveloping their chosen procedures
? redefining their questions and/or hypotheses
? modifying their methodologies or designs
? conducting further practical investigations
? conducting further secondary research.

Students are also encouraged to communicate evidence-based conclusions and suggest ideas for future research. Unexpected results are to be welcomed to refine methodologies and to generate further investigation. Knowledge and understanding of science is essential to these processes. Through this practice of science, students can acquire a deeper knowledge and understanding of scientific concepts.



Each of the seven Working Scientifically outcomes represents one of the interdependent dynamic processes that are central to the study of Science and the acquisition of scientific knowledge and skills. This course is structured to provide ongoing opportunities for students to implement these processes, particularly through the depth study provision. The following descriptions of the Working Scientifically outcomes provide further information about the skills students are expected to develop throughout the course.
Questioning and Predicting
Developing, proposing and evaluating inquiry questions and hypotheses challenges students to identify an issue or phenomenon that can be investigated scientifically by gathering primary and/or secondary-sourced data. Students develop inquiry question(s) that require observations, experimentation and/or research to aid in constructing a reasonable and informed hypothesis. The consideration of variables is to be included in the questioning process. 


Planning Investigations
Students justify the selection of equipment, resources chosen and design of an investigation. They ensure that all risks are assessed, appropriate materials and technologies are sourced, and all ethical concerns are considered. Variables are to be identified as independent, dependent and controlled to ensure a valid procedure is developed that will allow for the reliable collection of data. Investigations should include strategies that ensure controlled variables are kept constant and an experimental control is used as appropriate.
Conducting Investigations
Students are to select appropriate equipment, employ safe work practices and ensure that risk assessments are conducted and followed. Appropriate technologies are to be used and procedures followed when disposing of waste. The selection and criteria for collecting valid and reliable data is to be methodical and, where appropriate, secondary-sourced information referenced correctly.
Processing Data and Information 
Students use the most appropriate and meaningful methods and media to organise and analyse data and information sources, including digital technologies and the use of a variety of visual representations as appropriate. They process data from primary and secondary sources, including both qualitative and quantitative data and information.
Analysing Data and Information
Students identify trends, patterns and relationships; recognise error, uncertainty and limitations in data; and interpret scientific and media texts. They evaluate the relevance, accuracy, validity and reliability of the primary or secondary-sourced data in relation to investigations. They evaluate processes, claims and conclusions by considering the quality of available evidence, and use reasoning to construct scientific arguments. Where appropriate, mathematical models are to be applied, to demonstrate the trends and relationships that occur in data.
Problem Solving
Students use critical thinking skills and creativity to demonstrate an understanding of scientific principles underlying the solutions to inquiry questions and problems posed in investigations. Appropriate and varied strategies are employed, including the use of models, to qualitatively and quantitatively explain and predict cause-and-effect relationships. In Working Scientifically, students synthesise and use evidence to construct and justify conclusions. To solve problems, students: interpret scientific and media texts; evaluate processes, claims and conclusions; and consider the quality of available evidence.
Communicating
Communicating all components of the Working Scientifically processes with clarity and accuracy is essential. Students use qualitative and quantitative information gained from investigations using primary and secondary sources, including digital, visual, written and/or verbal forms of communication as appropriate. They apply appropriate scientific notations and nomenclature. They also appropriately apply and use scientific language that is suitable for specific audiences and contexts.


Investigations
An investigation is a scientific process to answer a question, explore an idea or solve a problem. Investigations include activities such as planning a course of action, collecting data, processing and analysing data, reaching a conclusion and communicating. Investigations may include the collection of primary and/or secondary-sourced data or information.

Practical investigations involve the collection of primary data. They may include:
? undertaking laboratory investigations, including fair tests and controlled experiments
? undertaking fieldwork and surveys
? constructing models.

Secondary-sourced investigations can include:
? researching by using a variety of media
? extracting and reorganising secondary-sourced information in the form of flow charts, tables, graphs, diagrams, prose, keys, spreadsheets and databases
? using models to inform understanding.
Safety
Schools have a legal obligation in relation to safety. Teachers will need to ensure that they comply with relevant legislation as well as system and school requirements in relation to safety when implementing their programs. This includes legislation and guidelines relating to Work Health and Safety, and the handling and storage of chemical and dangerous goods.
Animal Research
Schools have a legal responsibility in relation to the welfare of animals. The keeping of animals and all practical activities involving animals must comply with relevant guidelines or legislation.
Inquiry Questions
Inquiry questions are included in the course content and used to frame the syllabus content within each module. The depth of knowledge and understanding and skill development required to fully address the inquiry questions may vary. This allows for differentiation of the course content to cater for the diversity of learners.


Depth Studies: Year 11 and Year 12
What are Depth Studies?
A depth study is any type of investigation/activity that a student completes individually or collaboratively that allows the further development of one or more concepts found within or inspired by the syllabus. It may be one investigation/activity or a series of investigations/activities.

Depth studies provide opportunities for students to pursue their interests in physics, acquire a depth of understanding, and take responsibility for their own learning. Depth studies promote differentiation and engagement, and support all forms of assessment, including assessment for, as and of learning. Depth studies allow for the demonstration of a range of Working Scientifically skills.

A depth study may be, but is not limited to:
? a practical investigation or series of practical investigations and/or a secondary-sourced investigation or series of secondary-sourced investigations
? presentations, research assignments or fieldwork reports
? the extension of concepts found within the course, either qualitatively and/or quantitatively.

The length of time for any individual study and the pedagogies employed are not prescribed. The time for the depth studies may be allocated to a single study or spread over the year, and incorporate several studies depending on individual school and/or class requirements.
Requirements for Depth Studies
? A minimum of 15 hours of in-class time is allocated in both Year 11 and Year 12.
? At least one depth study must be included in both Year 11 and Year 12.
? The two Working Scientifically outcomes of Questioning and Predicting and Communicating must be addressed in both Year 11 and Year 12.
? A minimum of two additional Working Scientifically skills outcomes, and further development of at least one Knowledge and Understanding outcome, should be addressed in all depth studies.
Ideas for Depth Studies
Practical Investigations
? Design and conduct experiments
? Test a claim
? Test a device
Secondary-sourced Investigations
? Make a documentary or media report
? Conduct a literature review
? Develop an evidence-based argument 
? Write a journal article
? Write an essay - historical or theoretical
? Develop an environmental management plan
? Analyse a work of fiction or film for scientific relevance
? Create a visual presentation
? Investigate emerging technologies
Creating
? Design and invent
? Create a working model
? Create a portfolio
Fieldwork
Fieldwork may be a starting point for a practical investigation or secondary-sourced study and could be initiated by the following stimuli:
? an excursion
? engagement with community experts.
Data Analysis
Data analysis may be incorporated into a practical investigation or secondary-sourced investigation. For example:
? construction and analysis of graphs/tables
? data analysis from a variety of sources
? research analysis, eg of longitudinal data, resource management data.




Learning Across the Curriculum
Learning across the curriculum content, including the cross-curriculum priorities and general capabilities, assists students to achieve the broad learning outcomes defined in the NESA Statement of Equity Principles, the Melbourne Declaration on Educational Goals for Young Australians (December 2008) and in the Australian Government's Core Skills for Work Developmental Framework (2013).

Cross-curriculum priorities enable students to develop understanding about and address the contemporary issues they face.

The cross-curriculum priorities are:
? Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander histories and cultures 
? Asia and Australia's engagement with Asia 
? Sustainability. 

General capabilities encompass the knowledge, skills, attitudes and behaviours required to assist students live and work successfully in the 21st century.

The general capabilities are:
? Critical and creative thinking 
? Ethical understanding 
? Information and communication technology capability 
? Intercultural understanding 
? Literacy 
? Numeracy 
? Personal and social capability. 

NESA syllabuses include other areas identified as important learning for all students, including:
? Civics and citizenship 
? Difference and diversity 
? Work and enterprise. 

Learning across the curriculum content is incorporated, and identified by icons, in the content of the Physics Stage 6 Syllabus in the following ways.


Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Histories and Cultures 
Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander communities have diverse cultures, social structures and a history of unique, complex knowledge systems. In Physics students are provided with opportunities to learn about how Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples have developed and refined knowledge about the world through observation, making predictions, testing (trial and error) and responding to environmental factors within specific contexts. Students investigate examples of Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander Peoples' understanding of the environment and the ways in which traditional knowledge and Western scientific knowledge can be complementary.

When planning and programming content relating to Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander histories and cultures teachers are encouraged to:
? involve local Aboriginal communities and/or appropriate knowledge holders in determining suitable resources, or to use Aboriginal or Torres Strait Islander authored or endorsed publications
? read the Principles and Protocols relating to teaching and learning about Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander histories and cultures and the involvement of local Aboriginal communities.
Asia and Australia's Engagement with Asia 
Asia and Australia's engagement with Asia provides rich and engaging contexts for developing students' scientific and technological knowledge, understanding and skills. In Physics students are provided with opportunities to recognise that the Asia region includes diverse environments. They are provided with opportunities to appreciate how interactions within and between these environments and the impacts of human activity influence the region, including Australia, and have significance for the rest of the world.

Asia plays an important role in scientific and technological research and development in areas such as medicine, natural resource management and natural disaster prediction and management.
Sustainability 
Sustainability is concerned with the ongoing capacity of the Earth to maintain all life. It provides authentic contexts for exploring, investigating and understanding systems in the natural and human-made environments. In Physics students are provided with opportunities to investigate relationships between systems and system components, and consider the sustainability of food sources and the natural and human environments. Students engage in ethical debate and with different perspectives in solving ethical problems.
Critical and Creative Thinking 
Critical and creative thinking are integral to activities where students learn to generate and evaluate knowledge, clarify concepts and ideas, seek possibilities, consider alternatives and solve problems. Critical and creative thinking are embedded in the skills and processes of Working Scientifically. In order to make evidence-based decisions, students are provided with opportunities to develop critical and creative thinking skills through: asking and posing questions; making predictions; engaging in practical and secondary-sourced investigations; and analysing and evaluating evidence.


Ethical Understanding 
Students are provided with opportunities to develop the capability to assess ethical values and principles, and to understand how reasoning can assist ethical judgement. In Physics students are provided with opportunities to form and make ethical judgements in relation to scientific investigations, design, codes of practice, and the use of scientific information and applications. Students explore the importance of reporting honestly based on evidence. They apply ethical guidelines in their investigations, particularly in regard to the implications for others and the environment.
Information and Communication Technology Capability 
Information and communication technology (ICT) can be used effectively and appropriately to access, create and communicate information and ideas, solve problems and work collaboratively. In Physics students are provided with opportunities to develop ICT capability when they: develop alternative ideas and solutions; research science concepts and applications; investigate scientific phenomena; and communicate their scientific and technological understandings. In particular, they have opportunities to learn to: access information; collect, analyse and represent data; model and interpret concepts and relationships; and communicate scientific and technological ideas, processes and information.
Intercultural Understanding 
Students develop intercultural understanding as they learn to understand themselves in relation to others. This involves students valuing their own cultures and those of others, and engaging with people of diverse cultures in ways that recognise commonalities and differences, create connections and cultivate respect. In Physics students are provided with opportunities to appreciate how diverse cultural perspectives have impacted on the development, breadth and diversity of scientific knowledge and applications. They learn about and engage with issues requiring cultural sensitivity, and learn that scientists work in culturally diverse teams to address issues and solve problems of national and international importance.
Literacy 
Literacy is the ability to use a repertoire of knowledge and skills to communicate and comprehend effectively, using a variety of modes and media. Being 'literate' is more than the acquisition of technical skills - it includes the ability to identify, understand, interpret, create and communicate effectively using written, visual and digital forms of expression and communication for a number of purposes. In Physics students are provided with opportunities to understand that language varies according to the context and engage with different forms of written and spoken language to communicate scientific concepts. They learn that scientific information can also be presented in the form of diagrams, flow charts, tables, graphs and models.
Numeracy 
Numeracy involves recognising and understanding the role of mathematics in the world. Students become numerate as they develop the confidence, willingness and ability to apply mathematics in their lives in constructive and meaningful ways. In Physics students are provided with opportunities to develop numeracy skills through practical measurement and the collection, representation and interpretation of data from first-hand investigations and secondary sources. Students consider issues of uncertainty and reliability in measurement and have opportunities to learn data analysis skills, identifying trends and patterns from numerical data and graphs. They apply mathematical relationships and concepts in order to solve problems.
Personal and Social Capability 
Students develop personal and social capability as they learn to understand and manage themselves, their relationships and their lives more effectively. This includes establishing positive relationships, making responsible decisions, working effectively individually and in teams, and constructively handling challenging situations. Through applying the processes of Working Scientifically, students can develop skills in collaboration, peer assessment and review. They plan and conduct a depth study either individually or in a team.
Civics and Citizenship 
Civics and citizenship content involves knowledge and understanding of how our Australian society operates. In Physics students are provided with opportunities to broaden their understanding of aspects of civics and citizenship related to the application of scientific ideas and technological advances, including ecological sustainability and the development of environmental and sustainable practices at a local, regional and national level. 
Difference and Diversity 
Difference and diversity comprise gender, race and socio-economic circumstances. Students are provided with opportunities to understand and appreciate the difference and diversity they experience in their everyday lives. Working Scientifically provides opportunities for students to work collaboratively, where they can develop an appreciation of the values and ideas of all group members. This appreciation also enables students to identify individual rights, challenge stereotypes and engage with opinions that are different to their own.
Work and Enterprise 
Students can develop work-related skills and an appreciation of the value of working individually and collaboratively when conducting investigations. In Physics students are provided with opportunities to prioritise safe practices and understand the potential risks and hazards present when conducting investigations. They engage with risk assessment while working safely in the laboratory or the field.


Physics Year 11 Course Content
Year 11 Course Structure and Requirements
Year 11 course