    
 
 
        
 
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  NSW Education Standards Authority 
2025 HSC Hospitality
Food and Beverage
Marking Guidelines 
Section I  
Multiple- choice Answer Key 
Question Answer 
1 C 
2 A 
3 A 
4 D 
5 B 
6 C 
7 C 
8 D 
9 B 
10 C 
11 B 
12 D 
13 B 
14 A 
15 B 
Page 1 of 13 

          
       
  
             
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
      
  
 
  
           
            
  
    
  NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Food and Beverage Marking Guidelines 
Section II 
Question  16 (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •      Outlines how ONE food safety program applies to a hospitality workplace   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information   1 
Sample answer: 
A food safety program is a written plan that outlines how a business identifies and controls 
food safety hazards. A food safety program such as HACCP ensures food is safe to eat.  
Question  16 (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Outlines  why  it  is  important  for  a  hospitality  worker  to  declare  information  
about  their  personal  health    2 
 •     Provides some relevant information   1 
Sample answer: It is important to declare notifiable diseases to protect public health. By declaring personal 
health issues, it reduces the spread of transmissible diseases that could be spread when 
food hand ling or in customer interactions. 
Question  16  (c)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Outlines  a safe food -handling work practice that  a hospitality business 
could implement  to ensure the safety of a  vulnerable customer , using an  
industry  example   3 
 •   Outlines a safe food -handling work practice that a hospitality business 
   could implement to ensure the safety of a vulnerable customer  2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: 
Using a thermometer to e nsure food is cooked to safe internal temperatures in order to kill 
harmful bacteria is a safe food -handling work practice. For example, when serving poultry to 
elderly customers in a nursing home, cooked poultry should be checked with a thermometer 
to ensure the internal temperature has reached 75°C to prevent salmonella poisoning . 
Page 2 of 13 

          
        
  
           
      
  
          
  
 
 
 
  
    
     
   
  
 
  
  
 
 
 NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Food and Beverage Marking Guidelines 
Question 17 
Criteria Marks 
• Identifies the purpose of the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 (NSW) 2 
• Provides some relevant information 1 
Sample answer: 
The purpose of the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 (NSW) is to provide a framework which 
ensures the health, safety and welfare of workers and workplaces. 
Question  18  (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •  Outline s the importance of quality assurance in a hospitality business   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: Quality assurance ensures that a business remains competitive and successful. Customers 
receive consistent high-quality service standards from every aspect of the hospitality 
business. This can lead to repeat business. 
Question  18  (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •      Explains strategies that a hospitality employee could use to provide 
    quality customer service to new and regular customers  4 
 •       Outlines strategies that a hospitality employee could use to provide 
     quality customer service to new or regular customers  3 
 •     Identifies aspects of quality customer service   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: 
To  p rovide  quality  customer  service  to  new customers ,  an employee could welcome them  
with  a  smile  and  engage  them  in  conversation  to  learn  more  about  the  customer.  They  could  
introduce  them  to  loyalty  programs  that  exist  within  the  business  to  encourage  return  
patronage.   
 
To  provide  quality  customer  service  to  regular  customers ,  an employee could welcome them  
by name, know th  eir  preference and   ensure  transactions are record ed  on the business’s 
loyalty  program.   
Page 3 of 13 

          
        
     
             
  
 
 
 
  
   
   
    
   
  
     
                
 
   
 
 NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Food and Beverage Marking Guidelines 
Question  19  (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •   Identifies the essential components of a pre -service briefing  2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: 
Components of a pre -service briefing should include information on menu items, guest 
information and roles and responsibilities assigned to food and beverage attendants for the 
service period. 
Question  19  (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •   Outlines the importance of having a well -stocked waiter/service station in 
  providing efficient service   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: 
A well -stocked waiter/service station supports the flow of service. It assists food and 
beverage attendants with providing efficient service and aids time management through 
accessibility to essential equipment used in a service period. 
Question  19  (c)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Describes  the  techniques  that a food and beverage attendant  could use 
to clear  and carry  multiple  used  plates  and  serviceware   3 
•  Describes  ONE  technique  for  clear ing  and/or  carrying  multiple  used  
plates and serviceware  
OR  
•  Identifies te  chniques for clearing and/or carrying multiple used plates and  
serviceware   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: 
Plates and serviceware could be discreetly taken from the table at an appropriate time . 
Plates and cutlery should be stacked in a manageable and organised pile to ensure safety of 
guests and employees. 
Page 4 of 13 

          
       
 
 
  
       
           
  
 
     
  
 
 NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Food and Beverage Marking Guidelines 
Question  20  (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •     Describes a possible adjustment to rectify the problem  3 
 •     Outlines a possible adjustment to rectify the problem  2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample  answer:  
A possible cause of  a deficiency  could include:  
•  Grind  being  too  coarse  and  therefore  the  extraction  being  too  fast.  A  suggested  
adjustment  for  this would be to amend the grind to be finer  and therefore slow dow  n the 
extraction rate.   
OR  
•  Coffee  grind  not  being  tamped  adequately  is  impacting  the  quality  of  extraction.  A 
suggested adjustment  for this would be to ensure that more pressure is applied by the  
barista when tamping the coffee,  this will  ensure the coffee is more tightly packed and will  
enhance the extraction of  coffee.   
Question  20 (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 • 
 •       Explains the impacts upon the customer and business of failing to follow 
   workplace -specific standards for the presentation of a mocktail  
 Uses an industry example  4 
 • 
 •      Outlines the impacts upon the customer and business of failing to follow 
   workplace -specific standards for the presentation of a mocktail  
   Uses an industry example  3 
 •        States impact of failing to follow workplace -specific standards for 
 presentation  2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: 
An employee has failed to follow the standard recipe card and used the incorrect glass and 
garnish for a mocktail. This inconsistency can result in customer dissatisfaction, which could 
reduce patronage and/or result in negative reviews. This could result in a possible breach of 
food safety as the beverage could now contain ingredients that were not previously outlined 
by waitstaff or the menu. 
Page 5 of 13 

          
        
  
    
 
 
      
     
 
 
    
     
 
    
       
       
      
  
 
 
 NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Food and Beverage Marking Guidelines 
Question 21 
Criteria Marks 
• Explains the importance of BOTH sequence and procedures in ensuring 
a successful service period when providing food and beverage service to 
customers 
• Uses specific industry examples 6 
• Outlines the importance of BOTH sequence and procedures in ensuring 
a successful service period when providing food and beverage service to 
customers 
• Uses industry examples 4–5 
• Outlines sequence and/or procedures, when providing food and/or 
beverage service to customers 
• Uses example(s) 3 
• Demonstrates some understanding of sequence and/or procedures, 
when providing food and/or beverage service 2 
• Provides some relevant information 1 
Sample answer: 
Sequence  r elates  to  the  order  in  which  tasks  are  completed  during  food  and  beverage  
service.  Having knowledge of  the expected sequence ensures that  all  components of  service 
are met.  This  ensures  all  guest  meals arrive at  the same time or  that  the presentation of  a bill  
occurs after  a table has been offered and declined dessert .  
 
Procedures  are  specific  to  each  establishment  and  are  embedded  in  staff  training  to  ensure  
staff  are aware of  the expectations and minimum st  andards.  An  industry  example  may  
include  upselling  side  dishes  to  a  customer.  This  procedure  supports  guest  satisfaction  by  
providing options and aids in increasing sales for  the business.   
Page 6 of 13 

          
       
  
               
        
 
 
 
  
             
          
   
 
 
  
   
 
 
 
  NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Food and Beverage Marking Guidelines 
Section III 
Question  22 (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •       Identifies the key features of an à la carte menu   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: 
The key features of an à la carte menu are a range of dishes listed in each course, each dish 
is priced separately, dishes may/may not have description. 
Question  22 (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •       Provides a detailed explanation of the benefits of a food and beverage 
   attendant having knowledge of dishes, ingredients and preparation 
 techniques  5 
 •       Provides a sound explanation of the benefits of a food and beverage 
   attendant having knowledge of dishes, ingredients and preparation 
 techniques  4 
 •            Outlines information of the benefits of a food and beverage attendant 
   having knowledge of dishes, ingredients and preparation techniques  3 
 •    Provides some information of the benefits of a food and beverage 
    attendant having knowledge of dishes and/or ingredients and/or 
 preparation techniques  2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: 
A food and beverage attendant providing details of ingredients allows the customer to ensure 
a dish meets their dietary needs for example, the grilled surf and turf is gluten free to 
accommodate coeliac customers. Thus, enhances customer satisfaction by ensuring dietary 
requirements are met. Providing details of preparation techniques allows customers to pick 
dishes aligned to preference for example , health- conscious customers may be interested in 
grilled vs fried food. Sharing this information supports cus tomers to make choices aligned 
with personal preferences. 
Page 7 of 13 

          
      NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Food and Beverage Marking Guidelines 
Question  22 (c)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 • 
 •      Provides a comprehensive explanation of roles and responsibilities of a 
  food and beverage team when preparing for and serving customers the 
menu  
 Includes pre -service tasks, activities during service and post -service 
 tasks  8 
 • 
 •        Provides a sound explanation of the roles and responsibilities of a food 
   and beverage team when preparing for and serving customers the menu 
  Includes pre -service tasks, activities during service and post-service 
 tasks  6–7 
 • 
 •      Provides information on the roles and responsibilities of a food and 
       beverage team when preparing for and serving customers this menu 
  Includes pre -service tasks and/or activities during service and/or 
 post-service tasks  4–5 
 • 
 •         Provides basic information on role(s) and/or responsibilities(s) of a food 
 and beverage team 
         Uses an example from pre and/or during and/or post-service tasks  2–3 
 •    Provide some relevant information  1 
Answers  could incl ude:  
Roles  and  responsibilities  of  the  food  and  beverage  team m  ay  include:  
•  Pre-service  
–  Confirm t  he  appropriate  ambience  is  achieved  by  ensuring  the  restaurant  is  clean,  
lighting  is  correct  and  the  music  is  suitable .  
–  Ensure  that  each  table  is  set  to  support  the  service  of  the  à  la  carte menu.  This would  
include  specific cut  lery  and glassware setting  and placement .  
–  All  supplies  and  equipment  should  be  checked  and  stocked  prior  to  service  to  ensure  
attendants are not  having to find stock and equipment  during service.  This includes 
polishing and cleaning serviceware and cutlery .  
–  Attend  a  pre-service briefing,  so that  they can provide accurate information to 
customers,  clarify the requirements of  service and communicate with all  working 
sections of  the business.  This will  ensure quality customer  service.  
•  During  service  
–  To  promote  quality  customer  service,  food  and  beverage  attendants  should  greet  
customers and accurately take customer  orders .  
–  Attendants  should  have  a  thorough  knowledge  of  dishes  on  the  menu  to  ensure  any  
dietary or  special  requests can be accommodated accurately.  Example  –  knowledge of  
gluten free dishes on the à  la  carte menu .  
–  Serviceware  such  as  cutlery  and  glassware  should  be  changed  for  each  guest  to  align  
with  the  dish  ordered  on  the  menu.  Example  –  entrée cutlery may need to be added for  
customers and a steak knife added for  those customers who ordered a steak .  
–  Ensure  that  tables  are  monitored  and  customers’  needs  are  met  in  a  timely  manner.  
This  ensures  reduced  waiting  times  and  dishes  are  served  at  the  appropriate  
temperatures .  
–  Staff  should  check  in  with  customer s  to ensure satisfaction and clear table of any used  
serviceware.  
Page 8 of 13 

          
       
 
  NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Food and Beverage Marking Guidelines 
–  Processing  payments  should  be  quick  and  accurate,  and  staff  should  farewell  
customers.   
•  Post-service  
–  Clear  tables  and  clean  the  restaurant ;  restock supplies and tak e  out  garbage.  This will  
ensure that  the restaurant  is ready for  the next  service .  
–  In a post -service briefing staff  can report  any problems that  occurred during service,  so 
they can be resolved.  
 
These  responsibilities  ensure  good  coordination  between  staff,  good  time  management  and  
create a positive dining experience for  customers .  
 
Page 9 of 13 

          
        
  
            
      
 
        
         
            
    
 
        
        
       
      
        
         
     
    
      
  NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Food and Beverage Marking Guidelines 
Section IV  
Question 23 
Criteria Marks 
• Provides a comprehensive analysis of the impact of the human, social, 
economic and organi sational costs of workplace injury on the hospitality 
industry 
• Presents a logical and cohesive response 
• Uses specific hospitality industry examples and terminology 13–15 
• Provides a detailed explanation of the impact of the human, social, 
economic and organi sational costs of workplace injury on the hospitality 
industry 
• Presents a logical and cohesive response 
• Uses hospitality industry examples and terminology 10–12 
• Outlines the impact of the human, social, economic and organi sational 
costs of workplace injury on the hospitality industry 
• Uses hospitality industry examples and/or terminology 7–9 
• Provides some information about human and/or social and/or economic 
and/or organi sational costs of workplace injury on the hospitality industry 
• Provides example(s) 4–6 
• Provides some relevant information 1–3 
Answers could include: 
Workplace  in jury  can  have  a  significant  human,  economic,  social  and  organisational  impact  
that affect s  employees, businesses and society. Workplace injuries within the hospitality  
industry  are  varied , including  implications  associated  with  levels  of  impairment  and  time  
required off work.  
 
Addressing  these  multifaceted  costs  requires  a  proactive  approach  that  prioritises  safety,  
fosters a culture of positive wellbeing and encourages robust risk management strategies to  
protect  workers and ensure the sustainability of  the business.   
 
•  Human  costs:  
–  Injury  can lead to stress,  anxiety and depression that  impact  quality of  life.  
–  Lack of  independence  and  ability to engage in the workforce  can have a detrimental  
impact  on  wellbeing.   
–  The  pain  and  trauma  associated  with  injury  can  impact  mental,  emotional  and  physical  
health.  
 
•  Economic  costs:  
–  Higher  insurance  premiums,  recruitment  and training costs  
–  Additional  wages  for  casual  staff  replacing  injured  workers  
–  Decreased  profitability  and  increased  legal  costs  
–  Modifications  to  workplace  or  equipment.   
  
Page 10 of 13 

          
        NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Food and Beverage Marking Guidelines 
•  Social  costs:  
–  Family  members  may  be  placed  under  financial  pressure  with  a  significant  loss  of  
income  and  increased  medical expenses.   
–  Family members may have to  provide care,  and  therefore may impede their ability to  
earn an income or  impact  their  wellbeing.  
–  Increased  demand for  medical  services,  which could affect the availability to medical  
services for  the wider  community.   
–  Staff  shortages  in  the  workplace  may  increase  anxiety,  fearing  similar  risks,  and  stress  
due to taking on additional  tasks or  shifts.   
 
•  Organisational  costs:  
–  Decrease  in  working  hours  and decreased efficiency.  
–  Low m orale,  leading  to increased staff absenteeism. A reduced workforce may result in  
delays in service,  impacting operational  efficiency and customer  satisfaction.    
–  Reduced  productivity,  staff  retention  and  reputational  damage.  
Page 11 of 13 

          
        
 
  
 
  
      
        
      
   
      
   
           
          
  
         
  
        
    
         
  
         
  
          
        
        
          
        
      
  
  
      
        
         
          
         
           
   
           
         
  
         
  
      
    NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Food and Beverage Marking Guidelines 
2025 HSC Hospitality
Food and BeverageMapping Grid 
Section I 
Question Marks HSC content – focus area 
1 1 Hygiene – compliance – page 25 
2 1 Food and Beverage – providing food and beverage service to 
customers – page 48 
3 1 Food and Beverage – providing food and beverage service to 
customers – page 48 
4 1 Food and Beverage – non-alcoholic beverages – page 48 
5 1 Working with colleagues and customers – anti-discrimination – 
page 42 
6 1 Food and Beverage – preparation specific to espresso coffee – 
page 53 
7 1 Food and Beverage – preparation specific to non -alcoholic 
beverages – page 52 
8 1 Food and Beverage – preparation specific to espresso coffee – 
page 52 
9 1 Food and Beverage – preparation specific to espresso coffee – 
page 53 
10 1 Food and Beverage – espresso coffee – page 49 
11 1 Hygiene – compliance – page 25 
12 1 Hygiene – food contamination and food -borne illnesses – page 28 
13 1 Food and Beverage – espresso coffee – page 49 
14 1 Safety – compliance – page 25 
15 1 Food and Beverage – providing food and beverage service to 
customers – page 48 
Section II 
Question Marks HSC content – focus area 
16 (a) 2 Hygiene – food safety program – page 26 
16 (b) 2 Hygiene – hazards impacting food safety – page 25 
16 (c) 3 Hygiene – safe food handling work practices – page 24 
17 2 Safety – WHS compliance – page 31 
18 (a) 2 Working with colleagues and customers – quality customer service 
– page 39 
18 (b) 4 Working with colleagues and customers – customers – page 39 
19 (a) 2 Food and Beverage – preparation for food and beverage service – 
page 46 
19 (b) 2 Food and Beverage – preparation for food and beverage service – 
page 46 
19 (c) 3 Food and Beverage – providing food and beverage service to 
customers – page 47 
Page 12 of 13 

          
            
         
  
          
   
      
   
  
      
           
      
    
           
  
      
           
 
 NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Food and Beverage Marking Guidelines 
Question Marks HSC content – focus area 
20 (a) 3 Food and Beverage – preparation specific to espresso coffee – 
page 53 
20 (b) 4 Food and Beverage – service of non -alcoholic beverages and 
espresso coffee – page 53 
21 6 Food and Beverage – providing food and beverage service to 
customers – page 46 
Section III 
Question Marks HSC content – focus area 
22 (a) 2 Food and Beverage – casual dining – page 45 
22 (b) 5 Food and Beverage – providing food and beverage service to 
customers – page 47 
22 (c) 8 Food and Beverage – casual dining – page 45 
Section IV 
Question Marks HSC content – focus area 
23 15 Safety – incidents, accidents and emergencies – page 35 
Page 13 of 13 

