    
 
 
        
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  NSW Education Standards Authority 
2025 HSC Food Technology
Marking Guidelines 
Section I  
Multiple- choice Answer Key 
Question Answer 
1 C 
2 A 
3 C 
4 D 
5 D 
6 B 
7 C 
8 D 
9 B 
10 B 
11 C 
12 B 
13 C 
14 A 
15 B 
16 D 
17 C 
18 A 
19 D 
20 D 
Page 1 of 14 

       
       
  
    
      
  
              
  
 
 NESA 2025 HSC Food Technology Marking Guidelines 
Section II 
Question  21 (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Outlines  ONE  research  and  development  activity  carried  out  by  the  
organisation   2 
•  Provides  some  relevant  information   1 
Sample answer: 
Name of organisation: A supermarket 
A supermarket conducts surveys to determine store layout for customer convenience. 
Answers could include: 
A supermarket may collect data on store sales to determine stock levels and what products 
are being bought and sold to customers. 
Question  21  (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Provides  a  thorough  description  of  how lifestyle  changes  have  been  
addressed by the organisation   4 
•  Provides  a  sound  description  of  how lifestyle  changes  have  been  
addressed by the organisation   3 
•  Provides  some  description  of  how lifestyle  changes  have  been  
addressed by the organisation   2 
•  Provides  some  relevant  information   1 
Sample  answer:  
A supermarket  has  addressed  lifestyle  changes  by  promoting  healthier  eating  habits  and  
providing convenient  meal  options  and fresh produce . The supermarket also provides online  
meal  plans  and  recipes  that  cater  to  busy  lifestyles,  making  it  easier  for  people  to  prepare  
nutritious meals at  home.  They  encourage  the use of reusable bags  to align  with  the  growing  
consumer  interest  in  environmentally  friendly  practices.  
Answers  could include:  
•  Click  and  Collect  
•  Use  of  QR codes  to  help  customers  make  informed  decisions  
•  Increased variety of foods that are low salt, high fibre  and high protein  
•  Supermarket  may  stock  different  foods ,  according to cliental  eg  culturally diverse foods in 
a more heavily ethnic community  
•  Diet  trends  eg  vegan  and paleo  
•  Ageing  population   
•  Economic  pressures  
•  More  people  working  from home  which  has  influenced  snacking  and  meal  options .  
Page 2 of 14 

       
       
 
    NESA 2025 HSC Food Technology Marking Guidelines 
Question  22 (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Identifies  TWO r  easons  why  some  food manufacturers prefer using  
plastic packaging   2 
•  Provides  some  relevant  information   1 
Sample  answer:  
Food  manufacturers  prefer  to  use  plastic  because  it  is  lightweight  and  cheaper  to  produce.   
Answers  could include:  
•  Durable  
•  Preserve  food  
•  Recyclable .  
Question  22  (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Describes  TWO  examples of  tamper -evident packaging  used  by  a  food  
manufacturer  to ensure the safety of its  products in  retail facilities   3 
•  Describes  ONE  example of  tamper- evident  packaging  used  by  a  food  
manufacturer  to ensure the safety of its  products in  retail facilities  
OR  
•  Outlines  TWO e  xamples  of  tamper -evident  packaging  used  by  a  food  
manufacturer  to ensure the safety of its  products in  retail facilities   2 
•  Provides  some  relevant  information   1 
Sample  answer:  
A manufacturer  could  use  a  range  of  different  tamper -evident  packaging to ensure the safety 
of  the food product  in the retail  store.  For  example,  plastic shrink -wrapped  seal  around  the  lid  
of  a bottle.  They could place a layer  of  foil  under  the lid of  the bottle or  put  a plastic ring/collar  
around the container.   
Answers  could include:  
•  Screw top  jars  that  go  pop  
•  Paper  or  plastic  strips  that  extend  from t he  lid  down  the  side  of  the  container  that  break  
when  the  lid  is  turned  
•  Plastic  wrapping  around  a  food  product  that  must  be  undone  before  using/opening  it.  
Page 3 of 14 

       
        
        
  
            
    
   
 
 
 
  
    NESA 2025 HSC Food Technology Marking Guidelines 
Question  22  (c)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Thoroughly  explains  the importance of accurate food labelling for 
consumers   4 
•  Explains  the importance of accurate food labelling for consumers   3 
•  Outlines  the importance of accurate food labelling for consumers   2 
•  Provides  some  relevant  information   1 
Sample answer: 
Accurate food labelling enables information about ingredients, allergens and nutritional 
content. This helps individuals make informed dietary choices, avoid health risks and 
manage conditions like allergies or diabetes. Food labelling that includes the name and 
address of the manufacturing company will enable tracking of food products that are found to be faulty. It enables customers to provide feedback to the company. Food labelling legislation 
also prevents inaccurate food claim s. 
Question  23  (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Describes  a strategy  that promotes  good  health for  a specific group   3 
•  Outlines  a strategy  that promotes good health for a specific group   2 
•  Provides  some  relevant  information   1 
Sample answer: 
Name  of  group:  teenage  girls  
 
The Australian Guide to Healthy Eating (AGHE)  educates teenage girls on a  balanced diet  
with  a  variety  of  foods  from t he  five  food  groups,  focusing  on  calcium f  or  bone  health  and  iron  
for preventing deficiencies.  
Page 4 of 14 

       
       
 
  NESA 2025 HSC Food Technology Marking Guidelines 
Question  23  (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Clearly  justifies  TWO m  odifications  to  the  breakfast  meal  plan  that meet 
the specific needs of the  named group   4 
•  Provides  some  justification  for  TWO m  odifications  to  the  breakfast  meal  
plan that meet the specific needs of the  named group  
OR  
•  Clearly  justifies  ONE modification  to  the  breakfast  meal  plan   3 
•  Provides  some  information  for  modification (s) to  the breakfast meal  plan  
that meets specific needs   2 
•  Provides  some  relevant  information   1 
Sample  answer:  
Group  studied:  teenage girls  
 
Modification:  replace brown sugar  with half  cup of  berries  and the coffee with a fruit  
smoothie made with milk  
 
Justification:  the addition of the half cup of berries provides teenage girls with a serve of 
fruit, soluble fibre and vitamins. This is essential for rapid growth and healthy  
digestion.  The milk in the smoothie provides calcium w  hich aids in increasing 
bone density for  rapid bone growth and development.  
Answers  could include:  
•  Addition  of  nuts  and  seeds  to  the  porridge  –  increase  iron  
•  Addition  of  a  fried  egg  to  the  breakfast  –  increase  protein  needed  for  growth  of  new  body  
tissues  
•  Addition  of  Greek  yoghurt  and  honey  –  added calcium f  or  bone development,  muscle 
contraction/relaxation  
•  Replace  white  bread/toast  with  wholemeal  to  increase  fibre  for  gut  health.  
Page 5 of 14 

       
        
 
  NESA 2025 HSC Food Technology Marking Guidelines 
Question  23  (c)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Provides  a  detailed description of  how t he economic environment  can 
affect  the development  of  new f ood products   4 
•  Provides  a  description  of  how the  economic  environment  can  affect  the  
development  of  new f ood products   3 
•  Outlines  how  the  economic  environment  can  affect  the  development  of  
new f ood products   2 
•  Provides  some  relevant  information   1 
Sample answer: 
The  economic  environment  can  influence  the  demand  and  creation  for  new food  products.  
High  inflation  and  tariffs  increase  production  cost  which  make  it  hard  for companies to 
compete.  
 
During  times  of  high  economic  growth,  companies  will  invest  in  products  such  as  ‘new to  the  
world’  as  they  would  feel  comfortable  in  investing  in  new equipment  and  taking  risks  if  the  
product  fails.  Likewise,  tariffs will  increase the cost  of  foods which could reduce consumer  
confidence.  
Page 6 of 14 

       
        
            
          
    
 
 
 
  
    NESA 2025 HSC Food Technology Marking Guidelines 
Question  24 (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Outlines  TWO reasons  why  a can of  tomatoes may  bulge after  
processing   3 
•  Outlines  ONE  reason  why  a can of  tomatoes may  bulge after  processing   2 
•  Provides  some  relevant  information   1 
Sample answer: 
A can of tomatoes may bulge after it has been processed due to i nadequate heating during 
manufacture . This may result in failure to kill microorganisms which then grow and produce 
gases expanding the can. Damage to the lining of the can (dropped or mislabelled) causes 
foods to react with the can, causing damage and providing gas which makes the can bulge. 
Question  24  (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Thoroughly  describes  the  quality management  procedures involved in 
the  commercial  production of  a food product   4 
•  Describes  the  quality management  procedures involved in the  
commercial  production of  a food product   3 
•  Outlines  quality management  procedures involved  in  the  commercial  
production of  a food product   2 
•  Provides  some  relevant  information   1 
Sample answer: 
During  a  quality  assurance  audit,  inspectors  focus  on  identifying  potential  hazards  and  
ensuring that  cleanliness and hygiene standards are maintained throughout  the production or  
manufacturing  process.  
 
Hazard  Analysis  Critical  Control  Point  (HACCP)  is  used  to  identify  potential food  safety  
hazards and establish critical  control  points in the production process.  Regular  temperature 
monitoring , microbiological testing  and employee  training  is  undertaken  to  ensure  this.  
Page 7 of 14 

       
        
            
      
     
  
 
 
  
  
  NESA 2025 HSC Food Technology Marking Guidelines 
Question  25  (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Provides  a  thorough explanation of the  benefits of  preserving foods   4 
•  Provides  a  sound  explanation  of  the  benefits of  preserving foods   3 
•  Provides  some  explanation  of  the  benefits of  preserving foods   2 
•  Provides  some  relevant  information   1 
Sample answer: 
Preserving food extends the shelf life of perishable items by preventing microbial growth. It 
also allows for seasonal foods to be enjoyed all year round, as fruits can be made into jams 
or frozen to use at a later date . Additionally, preserving food helps maintain its nutritional 
value, as methods like freezing lock in vitamins and minerals. 
Question  25  (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Provides  a  thorough  comparison  of  the effectiveness of temperature  
control  with  ONE  other  preservation  principle   5 
•  Provides  a  sound comparison of  the  effectiveness of  temperature control  
with  ONE  other  preservation  principle   4 
•  Provides  some  comparison  of  the effectiveness  of  temperature control  
with  ONE  other  preservation principle   3 
•  Outlines  the effectiveness of temperature control and/or  ONE  
preservation principle   2 
•  Provides  some  relevant  information   1 
Sample answer: Temperature  c
 ontrol,  through  refrigeration  and  freezing,  slows  down  the  growth  of  
microorganisms  and  enzymatic  activity  by  lowering  the  temperature  to  levels  unsuitable  for  
bacterial  growth.  This method effectively preserves the product  for  a longer  period of  time .  
 
Dehydration works by removing moisture from f  ood,  which inhibits microbial  growth since 
bacteria and mould require water  to thrive.  This extends shelf  life significantly without  the 
need for  refrigeration.   
Page 8 of 14 

       
        
  
        
 
     
        
 
 
      
        
  
    
        
  
     
      
 
  NESA 2025 HSC Food Technology Marking Guidelines 
Question 26 
Criteria Marks 
• Provides an extensive explanation of how TWO sectors of the Australian 
food industry have responded to the growing popularity of plant -based 
foods 
• Provides relevant examples 8 
• Provides a thorough explanation of how TWO sectors of the Australian food industry have responded to the growing popularity of plant- based 
foods 
• Provides some relevant examples 6–7 
• Provides a sound explanation of how TWO sectors of the Australian food 
industry have responded to the growing popularity of plant- based foods 
• Provides examples 4–5 
• Provides a limited explanation of how the sector(s) of the Australian f ood 
industry have responded to the growing popularity of plant- based foods 
• May provide examples 2–3 
• Provides some relevant information 1 
Answers  could include:  
Agriculture  and  fisheries  
•  Farmers  have  increased  the  production  of  key  ingredients  eg  soybeans  to  meet  the  
demands for  plant- based meats.  
•  Businesses  are exploring the use of  seaweed and algae farming to use as ingredients for  
plant -based meats.  
 
Food  processing and  manufacture  
•  Companies  are  producing  plant -based burger  patties,  mince and sausages to compete 
with  traditional  meat  products.   
•  Extrusion  technology  has  improved  the  quality  of  plant -based meat  production.  
 
Food  service and catering  
•  Fast  food  chains  have  introduced  plant -based burgers.   
•  Fine  dining  restaurants  are  also  offering  gourmet  plant -based meat  dishes and working 
with  large  companies  to  incorporate  plant -based meats into their  menus.  
•  Catering  businesses  now give  options  in  meal  kits  to  cater  for  plant -based options.  
 
Food  retail  
•  Major  supermarkets  are now st  ocking lots of  plant -based meat  alternatives.  
•  Retailers  are  developing  their  own  brands  of  plant -based meats.   
Page 9 of 14 

       
       
  
      
                
 
  
                
     
 
 
  
  NESA 2025 HSC Food Technology Marking Guidelines 
Section III 
Question  27  (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Describes  ONE additive  that  could  be  used  during  the  commercial  
manufacture  of  the  product   2 
•  Provides  some  relevant  information   1 
Sample answer: 
One additive that could be used during the commercial manufacture is an emulsifier . 
Emulsifiers such as lecithin could be used to help stop the ice cream from separating into 
layers. 
Answers could include: Thickeners may be used to increase the viscosity of the ice cream and contribute to the 
mouth feel of the product. 
Question  27  (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Provides  an  extensive  SWOT analysis  of  the  new pr oduct  for the  
manufacturing  company   5 
•  Provides  a  detailed  SWOT analysis  of  the  new pr oduct  for the  
manufacturing  company   4 
•  Provides  a  sound  SWOT analysis  of  the  new pr oduct  for the  
manufacturing  company   3 
•  Provides  a  basic  SWOT analysis  of  the  new pr oduct  for the  
manufacturing  company   2 
•  Provides  some  relevant  information   1 
Sample answer: 
Strength  –  the company already has equipment  to manufacture ice  cream so  it  is not  difficult  
to create another line extension/new flavour. The employees do not need to be retrained in  
other  skills.  
 
Weakness  –  native plants  are expensive to purchase and can be hard to buy in large 
quantities.  
 
Opportunity  –  the new i  ce cream coul  d be distributed nationwide which would increase 
company profits.  Recent  interest  in native ingredients  so the market  will  be receptive to the 
new f lavour.  
 
Threat  –  they need to invest  money to purchase new equi  pment  to make the ice cream.  If  the 
ice  cream f  lavour  is not  successful,  the extra cost  of  the machinery could be a burden on the 
company financially.  
Page 10 of 14 

       
       
  NESA 2025 HSC Food Technology Marking Guidelines 
Question  27  (c)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Proposes  an  extensive  marketing  plan  that could be used to market th e  
product   7–8 
•  Proposes  a  thorough  marketing  plan  that could be used to market the  
product   5–6 
•  Provides  a  sound  marketing  plan  that could be used to market the  
product   3–4 
•  Provides  a  limited  marketing  plan   2 
•  Provides  some relevant information   1 
Answer s could i  nclude :  
The  proposed  marketing  plan  is  based  on  the  4  Ps.  
•  The company could  highlight  the product ’s features that  are particularly unique to 
distinguish it  from ot  her  products and competitors , eg th e use of indigenous ingredients in  
the ice cream  and the use of  locally sourced ingredients.   
•  The  company  could  consider  what  price point  they wish to have the product  at.  A pr emium  
pricing strategy could be used to distinguish the ice cream f  rom t he other  ice cream  
products made by the company as well  as those already on the market.   
•  An intensive distribution method could  be used as the company wants to sell  the product  
nationwide.  This will  enable the product  to appear  in a range of  supermarkets from l  arge 
chains to smaller  convenience stores.   
•  The  company  could  draw customers  attention  to  the  product  by  using  in-store advertising 
such as posters and using an introductory competition (such as winning a holiday)  as an 
incentive  for  the  customer  to  try  the  product.  The  company  could also include the product  
in  the  supermarket  instore  magazine  which  provides  information  about  the  product  and  
the use of indigenous ingredients to persuade the customer. The  company  could  also  use  
a well -known member  of  the Aboriginal  and Torres Strait  Islander  community  to promote  
the ice cream.  
Page 11 of 14 

       
        
  
         
  
          
     
       
   
         
  
           
     
     
   
          
  
           
      
    
   
          
  
         
      NESA 2025 HSC Food Technology Marking Guidelines 
Section IV  
Question 28 
Criteria Marks 
• Demonstrates extensive knowledge and understanding of the influences 
on nutritional status 
• Provides an extensive assessment of how a person’s lifestyle, culture and social practices can affect their nutritional status 
• Provides a logical and cohesive response 
• Integrates relevant examples and appropriate terminology 13–15 
• Demonstrates thorough knowledge and understanding of the influences 
on nutritional status 
• Provides a thorough assessment of how a person’s lifestyle, culture and social practices can affect their nutritional status 
• Provides a logical response 
• Integrates relevant examples and appropriate terminology 10–12 
• Demonstrates sound knowledge and understanding of the influences on 
nutritional status 
• Provides a sound assessment of how a person's lifestyle and/or culture and/or social practices can affect their nutritional status 
• Provides some structure 
• Includes some relevant examples and some appropriate terminology 7–9 
• Demonstrates basic knowledge and understanding of the influences on 
nutritional status 
• May include an example and/or appropriate terminology 4–6 
• Provides some relevant information 1–3 
Answer s could i  nclude :  
•  People  can  typically  improve  their  nutritional  status  through  factors  such  as  how they  
choose to live,  cultural  practices they observe and who they socialise with.  
•  Adherence  to  a  well-balanced diet  and consistent  exercise can mostly ensure positive 
overall  health outcomes.  
•  Making  positive  lifestyle  choices  by  including  a  well-balanced nutritious diet  and engaging 
in  regular  movement  is  likely  to  increase  an  individual’s  life  expectancy.  
•  Lifestyle practices such as exercise,  alcohol  and use of  drugs affect  the nutritional status  
of  a person.  
•  Dietary  choices  may  result  in  diet-related disorders such as obesity, type 2 diabetes, 
hypertension,  cardiovascular  disease  and some types of  cancers.  
•  Cultural  practices  such  as  traditions,  which  are  closely  linked  to  religious  beliefs,  play  an  
important  role  in  the  food  we  choose,  as  well as  how  we  prepare  and  source  the  food.  
•  Socialising  could  include  some  type  of  celebration  with  food;  however,  with  the  increase d 
use  of  social  media,  this has been directly linked to trends in foods,  recipes ,  diet  and 
exercise influences.  
Page 12 of 14 

       
        
  
 
  
    
 
      
       
      
      
      
      
      
       
       
       
      
        
      
      
      
         
       
      
      
      
  
    
 
         
      
    
       
     
         
     
       
    
      
       
      NESA 2025 HSC Food Technology Marking Guidelines 
2025 HSC Food Technology
Mapping Grid 
Section I 
Question Marks Content Syllabus 
outcomes 
1 1 AFI – sectors H1.2 
2 1 FPD – steps in FPD H1.3 
3 1 FM – humectant H1.1 
4 1 AFI – food recall H1.2 
5 1 CNI – antioxidants H2.1 
6 1 AFI – legislation H1.2 
7 1 FPD – types of food product development H1.3 
8 1 FM – value add H1.1 
9 1 CNI – diet-related conditions H3.2 
10 1 AFI – genetically modified H1.2 
11 1 CNI – food allergies/intolerances H1.3 
12 1 AFI – levels of operation H1.2 
13 1 CNI – diabetes H3.2 
14 1 FM – processing equipment H1.1 
15 1 FM – active packaging H4.1 
16 1 FPD – life cycle of products H4.1 
17 1 FPD – Market research H4.1 
18 1 FM – production systems H1.1 
19 1 FM – fermentation H4.1 
20 1 FPD – price structure H1.3 
Section II 
Question Marks Content Syllabus 
outcomes 
21 (a) 2 Research and development of an organisation H3.1 
21 (b) 4 Lifestyle changes impact an organisation H3.1 
22 (a) 2 Packaging H1.1 
22 (b) 3 Designing safe food packaging H1.1 
22 (c) 4 Food labelling H1.2 
23 (a) 3 Nutritional considerations for a specific group H3.2 
23 (b) 4 Breakfast modification H5.1 
23 (c) 4 External factors (macro environment) H1.3 
24 (a) 3 Canning H4.1 
24 (b) 4 Quality management procedures H4.1 
25 (a) 4 Reasons for preserving food H4.2 
25 (b) 5 Food preservation principles H4.2 
Page 13 of 14 

       
          
 
        
  
    
 
     
    
     
  
    
 
     
 
 NESA 2025 HSC Food Technology Marking Guidelines 
Question Marks Content Syllabus 
outcomes 
26 8 Emerging technologies in food production H1.4 
Section III 
Question Marks Content Syllabus 
outcomes 
27 (a) 2 SWOT analysis H1.3 
27 (b) 5 Additives H4.2 
27 (c) 8 Marketing strategies H1.3 
Section IV 
Question Marks Content Syllabus 
outcomes 
28 15 Nutritional status H3.2 
Page 14 of 14 

