    
 
 
        
  
     
        
  
        
      
  
  
       
        NSW Education Standards Authority 
2025  HSC Music  1  Aural  Skills  
Marking  Guidelines  —  Written  Examination  
Question 1 
Criteria Marks 
• Describes in detail how variety is achieved in the excerpt 
• Demonstrates a developed aural understanding, using appropriate 
observations and examples 6 
• Describes how variety is achieved in the excerpt 
• Demonstrates aural understanding, using some observations and 
examples 4–5 
• Identifies some features of variety in the excerpt 
• Demonstrates a basic aural understanding 2–3 
• Demonstrates a limited aural understanding 1 
Sample  answer:  
The  addition  of  differing  layers  of  sound  gives  this  excerpt  variety  which  culminates  in  the  
chorus towards the end.  For  example,  a second guitar,  second vocal  and  half-time bass and  
drums introduced at  these regular  time periods provide variety needed to move the listener  to 
want  to  hear  the  chorus.  The  addition  of  the  drum set   and bass line in double- time changes  
the feel and emphasises the chord progression of the excerpt to achieve  variety, in  addition  to  
many  different  rhythms,  that provide  more  complex ity  with  additional  layers.  The  solo  vocal  
female melody adds melod ic  variety  over  the  repeated  chord  progression,  which  use  a  tonic -
dominant  relationship,  with 7ths and minor  chords in chorus.  
Answers  could include:  
•  Opening  with  guitar  chords define s  the key centre and inherent  variety  rhythms  of  the 
song  –  variations in this throughout  the excerpt  provide variety.  
•  Solo  vocal  melody  adds  interest  over  this  chord  progression .  
•  The  addition  of  a  second  guitar  playing  lower  voiced  chord  adds  a  new  layer  to  the  music .  
•  Harmony  vocals  add  variety  in  terms  of  pitch  and  tone  colour .  
•  The  introduction  of  the  syncopated  bass  guitar  and  bass  drum p  attern  together  with  
accented semiquaver  hi-hat  rhythm i  n a half -time  feel adds  variety.  
•  The  ever- growing  textural  intensity  leading  to  the  chorus  adds  variety.  
•  The  full  band  chorus  keeps  the  durational  content  and  direction  but  coalesces  these  parts  
into  a  satisfying  whole ,  which  is  different  from t he  beginning  of  the  excerpt ,  to create  
variety.  
•  The  double -time feel at the chorus adds a new level of intensity  thus creating variety .  
•  The  solo  acoustic  guitar  section  immediately  after  the  chorus  reinforces  the  key  and  
provides variety,  preparing for  the next  new sol o vocal  section of  the song.  
•  Many  vocal  techniques  are  used  to  create  variety.  For  example,  vocal  slides,  changing  of  
register, and mordents.   
Page 1 of 8 

            
        
  
         
   
      
  
          
   
      
  
          
   
       
          
       
 
       
       
 NESA 2025 HSC Music 1 Aural Skills Marking Guidelines – Written Examination 
Question 2 
Criteria Marks 
• Provides a detailed comparison of the 5 Seconds of Summer original and 
3% version of Youngblood 
• Demonstrates a highly developed aural understanding, using 
well-supported observations and examples 8 
• Provides a comparison of the 5 Seconds of Summer original and 
3% version of Youngblood 
• Demonstrates a developed aural understanding , using appropriate 
observations and examples 6–7 
• Provides some comparison of the 5 Seconds of Summer original and 
3% version of Youngblood 
• Demonstrates an aural understanding , using observations and examples 4–5 
• Demonstrates a basic understanding of the similarities and/or differences 
between the 5 Seconds of Summer original and 3% version of 
Youngblood 
• Demonstrates a basic aural understanding 2–3 
• Demonstrates a limited aural understanding 1 
Answers  could include:  
•  Similarities:  
–  Both  the  original  and  the  version  use  the  same  repeated  guitar  chord progression and 
guitar  riff.   
–  The  chord  progression  and  harmonic  rhythm i  s  similar  between  both  excerpts  during  
the pre- chorus.  
–  Both  excerpts  build  in  texture  during  the  verse.  For  example,  during the verse of  the 
original  finger ,  clicks are added .  
–  Shuffle  bass  rhythm  is  similar  between  both  excerpts  during  the  chorus.  
–  Similar  stepwise  melody  is  sung  during  the pre- chorus.  For  example,  You  push  and  
you push and I’m pul  ling away.  Pulling away from you.   I  give and I  give and I  give and 
you take,  give and you take .  
–  Both  excerpts  finish  with  a  descending  scalic  bass  run  and the end of  the chorus.  
–  Both  excerpts  use  a  guitar  riff  to  outline  the similar chord progression during the verse.  
–  Similar  tempos  are  maintained  through  both  excerpts.  
–  Rock  style  instruments  are  used  and  maintain  similar  roles  throughout  each  excerpt.  
–  Both  excerpt s  use even phrased textural  layering during the verse.  For exam ple,  in  the  
original  finger  clicks and triplet  figure played by the guitar  is added after  8 bars.  In the 
version,  a 4-bar  vocal  riff  is added after  8 bars as well.  
–  Drums  play  a  repeated  shuffled/dotted  kick  snare  rhythm d  uring  the  chorus.  This  
shuffle rhythm i  s doubled by the bass guitar.  
Page 2 of 8 

            
       
 
 
  NESA 2025 HSC Music 1 Aural Skills Marking Guidelines – Written Examination 
•  Differences:   
–  The  version  uses  a  fusion  of  indigenous  musical  elements  and  rock  characteristics  
where  the  original  is  rock.  
–  The  version  uses  an  a  capella  introduction  sung  in  an Aboriginal  language  in  3rds.  
–  There  is  a  difference  in  the  introduction  sections  where  the  version  includes  an  
acapella sung in language in 3rds .  
–  During  the  version’s  introduction,  the  solo tenor  and didjeridu enter  in 5ths.  This 
resolves to tonic unison (note: the artist in  the version  references the  ‘didj’  which  has  
been the naming convention adopted here).  
–  The  main  vocal  melody  during  the  chorus  is  harmonised  in  the  version,  while  the  
original  is  not.  
–  Clap  sticks  and  didjeridu  in  the  version,  while  the  original use s  contemporary rock style 
instruments  only.  
–  Greater  distortion  on  the  guitar  used  throughout  the  version,  while  a  cleaner  tone  
colour  is produced in the original.  
–  The  didjeridu drone  is  used  during the verse in the version,  while the original  uses a 
repeated triplet riff by the electric guitar.  
–  Vocal  delivery  of  the  verse  in  the  version  is  spoken  or  rapped.  It  is  sung  in  the  original.  
–  A heavy  tone  colour  is  produced  by  the  combination  of  bass  guitar  and  didjeridu  in  the  
version.  The original  maintains a cleaner  guitar  tone colour.  
–  Sparse  texture  is  used  in  the  original,  while  the  version  uses  more  instruments  and  
layers  to  produce  a  thicker  texture.  For  example,  in  the  version’s  chorus  female  and 
male  backing  vocals  are  added,  thickening  the  texture.  
–  The  original  uses  crescendo  into  the  chorus  to  highlight  the  structural  change.  
However,  in  the  version,  more  vocal  layers  are added at  the chorus to define this 
structural  change.  
–  The  version  adds  a  repeated  vocal  during the verse.  
Page 3 of 8 

            
        
  
             
 
        
  
              
 
       
  
           
     
      
  
            
    
       
       NESA 2025 HSC Music 1 Aural Skills Marking Guidelines – Written Examination 
Question 3 
Criteria Marks 
• Explains in detail how style is used in the excerpt from Thick of It, 
referring to at least TWO concepts of music 
• Demonstrates a highly developed aural understanding of style, using 
well-supported observations and examples 8 
• Explains in some detail how style is used in the excerpt from Thick of It, 
referring to at least TWO concepts of music 
• Demonstrates a developed aural understanding of style, using 
appropriate observations and examples 6–7 
• Explains how style is used in this excerpt from Thick of It, referring to at 
least TWO concepts of music 
• Demonstrates a competent aural understanding of style, using 
observations and examples 4–5 
• Demonstrates a basic understanding of how style is used in the excerpt 
from Thick of It, referring to at least ONE concept of music 
• Demonstrates a basic aural understanding 2–3 
• Demonstrates a limited aural understanding 1 
Answers  could include:  
•  Tone  colour  
–  Characterised  by  a  variety  of  rich  tone  colours  using  instruments  commonly  found  in  
jazz  ensembles , such as trumpet, tenor saxophone and trombone  
–  Jazz big band ensemble which allows for  combination and blend of  instruments to 
create a wide range of  tone colours  characteristic of  the genre  
–  Changes  of  tone  colour  due  to  changes  in  role  from e nsemble  to  solo  eg,  trombone  
and saxophone.  Solos characteristic of  jazz styl e  eg,  slides,  bends and virtuosic ‘licks’  
–  In the verse, the saxophones play low closed voice chords in a lower register 
characteristic of  jazz style  
–  Chorus  section,  tone  colour  changes  to  bright  and  piercing  due  to  chordal  stabs  using  
wider  range  of  voicing  and  increased  dynamics  of  brass  and  saxophones.  
•  Duration  
–  Swing  rhythmic  feel  used  throughout via the drum set with swung quavers played on  
and in  the ride cymbal  and the vocal  delivery, typical of the jazz style  
–  Syncopated  accents  and  ‘bombs’  from t he  drum k  it  typical  of  jazz  style  
–  Phrases  often  highlighted  by  accented off  beat  chords  from saxophones, brass, piano  
and guitar  to highlight  syncopation,  typical  of  jazz style  
–  Syncopated  accented off  beat  chords  from brass and saxophones often between vocal  
phrases,  typical  of  jazz style  
–  Walking  bass  consistent  crotchet  rhythms,  typical  of  jazz  style  
–  Improvisation section of trombone and saxophone with complex rhythmic interplay, syncopated phrases,  and call  and response techniques,  common to jazz style  
–  Brass  and  saxophones  double  the  vocal  rhythms  on  as the sto -ry goes  to enhance  
syncopated rhythmic figure,  typical  of  jazz style.  
Page 4 of 8 

            
       
  
 
 NESA 2025 HSC Music 1 Aural Skills Marking Guidelines – Written Examination 
•  Pitch  
–  The  harmonic  style  of  this  excerpt  uses jazz extended chords in  complex  chord 
progressions  
–  Walking  bassline  moves  in  a  stepwise  ascending  and  descending  contour,  
characteristic of  a walking bass in jazz styles  
–  Use  of  closed  chord  voicings  during  the  verse  and  open  chord  voicings  in  the  chorus  
from the brass and saxophones, typical orchestration  of  jazz  style  
–  Fast  rate  of  harmonic  change  in  up-tempo jazz  style  q  =  150  
–  Chordal  harmony  using  inversions  allowing  bassline  to  walk  in  smooth  melodic  contour,  
characteristic of  jazz style  
–  Piano  and  guitar  comping /accompanying  with  jazz  style  chords  and  voicings  
–  The  vocalist  employs  a  wide  note  range  and  uses  embellishment  or  vocal  pitch  
techniques commonly found in jazz style, such as vocal slides and bends  
–  Greater  exploration  of  pitch  during  trombone  and  saxophone  solos  and  use  of  jazz  
improvisatory  techniques  such  as  bend,  slides,  trills,  virtuosic  flourishes  and  rapid  runs  
–  Low r egister  saxophone sectional  chords in the verse.  
•  Texture  
–  Predominantly  homophonic  texture,  with  a  melodic  role  of  the  voice,  supported  by  
accompaniment  instruments of  drum set  ,  bass,  guitar,  piano,  saxophones and brass,  
typical of jazz style  
–  Walking  bass  provides  constant  harmonic  support  
–  Roles  of  brass  and  saxophones  change  from a ccompaniment  to  improvised  solo,  
typical of jazz style  
–  Guitar  and  piano/keyboard  provide  harmonic  layers  throughout  
–  Use  of  accents  on  syncopated  rhythms/beats  from both rhythm section (drums, ba ss  
and guitar)  and saxes/brass, typical of jazz style  
–  Syncopated , close harmony voicing of  trombone and  saxophone texture during the 
verse is used so the male voice can be heard.  
•  Dynamics  and  Expressive techniques  
–  Dynamics  remain  consistent  throughout  the  verses  
–  Increase in volume in the chorus sections due to the nature of the vocal line where the  
vocalist  goes into a higher  register  
–  Increased volume due to brass and saxophones playing bright chordal stabs during  
chorus  
–  There  are  heavily  accented  off-beats,  vocal  slides and techniques of  improvisation of  
the trombone and the saxophone which include slides, bends and trills, typical of jazz  
style.  
•  Structure  
–  Use  of  riff-like  devices  in  chorus  section  by  brass  and  saxophones  
–  Use  of  call  and  response  techniques  between  vocal  soloist  and  brass/saxophones  in  
the  chorus  and improvised solo sections  
–  Use  of  verse/chorus/solo  sections,  common  to  jazz  style.  
Page 5 of 8 

            
        
  
         
   
       
  
          
   
        
  
     
 
          
           
  
       
       NESA 2025 HSC Music 1 Aural Skills Marking Guidelines – Written Examination 
Question 4 
Criteria Marks 
• Describes in detail the roles of performing media in relation to the 
structure of this excerpt , Juba Dance 
• Demonstrates a highly developed aural understanding, using 
well-supported observations and examples 8 
• Describes in some detail the roles of performing media in relation to the 
structure of this excerpt , Juba Dance 
• Demonstrates a developed aural understanding, using appropriate 
observations and examples 6–7 
• Describes the roles of performing media and/or structure of the excerpt , 
Juba Dance 
• Demonstrates an aural understanding, using observations and examples 4–5 
• Demonstrates a basic understanding of the performing media and/or the 
structure of the excerpt , Juba Dance 
• Demonstrates a basic aural understanding 2–3 
• Demonstrates a limited aural understanding 1 
Answers  could include:  
There  are  5  distinct  sections  (A–E), with each one being repeated (except the last section  E), 
and on the repeat  there are additional  performing media ,  as described below.   
•  A1  Performing  Media  roles:   
–  Melody  –  violins playing a semiquaver,  syncopated and repetitive soft  melodic motif  in 
the middle register.  
–  Accompaniment  –  pizzicato cello and timpani  plays a short  note  softly  on 1  and  3 
(note:  the music is fast 4/8; Allegro). The viola plays  ‘offbeat’  (beats  2 and  4)  3rds in 
repeated accompaniment.  
•  A2  Performing  Media  roles  (repeat of A1) :  
–  Melody  –  cello leads into the repeated violin melody as above.  
–  Accompaniment  –  repeated as above, with double bass playing the cello /timpani  
accompaniment  line an octave lower,  increasing the textural  density,  along with a dry 
drum.  The trombones double the viola pattern,  playing the ‘off-beat’  thirds an octave  
lower.   
–  Counter  melody  –  a longer  note- values clarinet  legato phrase has a small  step-wise  
movement  at  the  end  of  the  violin  melodic  statement.  The  clarinet  plays  softly  in  the  
middle  register.   
•  B1  Performing  Media  roles:  
–  Melody  –  now at   mezzo forte,  the trumpet  begins and then trombone joins in with the 
doubled ‘syn-co-pa’  pattern in the melodic material.  This is repeated.   
–  Accompaniment  –  maintaining  the  on  beat  1  and  3 tonic/dominant  ‘oom-pa’  style,  with 
double bass playing the cello /timpani accompaniment line. This is repeated. There is  
the addition of semiquaver scalic runs /arpeggiated patterns in violin as a new  
accompanying idea.  The violin semiquaver  accompaniment  is repeated.  The drum  
continues to maintain the pulse /beat  but  now has  more complex rhythmic patterns.  A  
syncopated short  cymbal  hit  marks the middle of  this section before the repeat  and is 
heard at  the end o f the section.  
Page 6 of 8 

            
       NESA 2025 HSC Music 1 Aural Skills Marking Guidelines – Written Examination 
•  B2  Performing  Media  roles  (repeat of B1) :  
–  Melody  –  Violin  melody  is  repeated  as  B1.  
–  Accompaniment  –  maintaining  the  on  beat  1  and  3 tonic/dominant  ‘oom-pa’  style,  with 
double bass playing the cello /timpani accompaniment line is repeated. There is the  
addition of  semiquaver  scalic runs/ arpeggiated patterns in violin as a new  
accompanying idea.  The violin semiquaver  accompaniment  is repeated.  The drum  
continues to maintain the pulse /beat  but  now al  so has more complex rhythmic patterns,  
and a syncopated short  cymbal  hit  marks end of  the section.  
•  C1  Performing  Media  roles:   
–  Melody  –  back to the violins.  Similar  in style to the musical  material  in the introduction,  
but  the notes are longer  and more connected.   
–  Accompaniment  –  maintaining  the  on  beat  1  and  3 via drum t  o continue the pulse /beat.  
A fun  ‘train whistle’  answers the violin melody.  There is also a short  ascending and 
descending semiquaver  pattern played by the cello and double bass.  There is 
sustained pedal  point  provide d  by violas,  which plays between train whistle calls.   
•  C2  Performing  Media  roles  (repeat of C1):  
–  Melody  –  repeated as above, with small variation in higher and wider intervallic leaps  
towards the end of the final phrase.  
–  Accompaniment  –  maintaining  the  on  beat  1  and  3 via drum t  o continue the pulse /beat.  
There  are  also  more  drumming  semiquaver  patterns.  There  is  also  a  short  ascending  
and descending semiquaver  pattern played by the cello and double bass.  There is a 
sustained pedal  point  provide d  by violas,  which plays between slide whistle calls.   
–  Counter  melody  by  cor  anglais  in  mid  register,  playing  a  detached  repeated  idea  with  
the violin melody.  
•  D1  Performing  Media  roles:  
–  Melody  –  doubled in unison by the clarinet  and cor  anglais,  which  is  based  on  the  
original  violin melody at  mezzo forte.  
–  Accompaniment  –  delicate ascending and descending arpeggio pattern by cello and 
double bass.  On beat  3, there is an accented chord (close harmony, with some  
dissonance,  range approx.  one octave,  all  in similar  register)  by strings and brass.  
There  is  a  drum p  attern  maintaining  drive  under  the  melody  with  .  
•  D2  Performing  Media  roles  (repeat of D1) :  
–  Melody  –  the clarinet and cor anglais melody is repeated by cello an octave lower  
–  Accompaniment  –  delicate ascending and descending arpeggio pattern by cello and 
double bass.  On beat  3, there is an accented chord (close harmony, with some  
dissonance,  range approx.  one  octave,  all  in similar  register)  by strings and brass.  
There  is  a  drum q  uaver  pattern  maintaining  drive  under  the  melody  .  
Addition  of  flute  flourish  at  the  end  of  each  phrase.   
–  Counter  melody  by  trumpets.  
•  E1  Performing  Media  roles:   
–  Melody  is  loud  and  doubled  by  orchestra  in  octaves  (flute,  violin,  trumpet).  
–  Accompaniment:  loud  and  new dry  drum r  hythm.  Timpani  more  prominent  on  beats  
1  and  3 in the second phrase of  this section.   
Page 7 of 8 

            
        
  
 
  
    
     
       
         
        
         
   
  
   NESA 2025 HSC Music 1 Aural Skills Marking Guidelines – Written Examination 
2025 HSC Music 1 
Mapping Grid 
Written Paper
Core — Aural Skills 
Question Marks Content Syllabus outcomes 
1 6 Variety (Australian music) H4, H6 
2 8 Similarities and differences (Popular music) H4, H6 
3 8 Style (Jazz) and concepts H4, H6 
4 8 Performing media and structure (Music for large ensembles) H4, H6 
Practical Examination Core — Performance 
 Question Marks   Content   Syllabus outcomes 
  20  Performance   H1, H7 
Practical  Examination  
Elective  —  Composition  / Musicology  / Performance  
Page 8 of 8  Question Marks   Content   Syllabus outcomes 
  20  Composition      H2, H3, H5, H7, H8 
  20  Musicology    H2, H3, H5 
  20  Performance   H1, H7 
 
 

