    
 
 
        
   
  
  
  
  
      
      
   
     
    
      
  
      
             
   
   
 
 
  NSW Education Standards Authority 
2025 HSC 
English as an Additional Language or Dialect
(EAL/D) — Listening Paper
Marking Guidelines 
Question 1 
Criteria Marks 
• Demonstrates a sound understanding of how D ave Marchese 
encourages the audience to be curious about tradies in the opening of 
this podcast, using well -selected textual references 3 
• Demonstrates some understanding of how D ave Marchese encourages 
the audience to be curious about tradies in the opening of this podcast, 
using relevant textual reference(s) 2 
• Provides some relevant information 1 
Sample answer: 
Dave Marchese encourages curiosity because he questions the stereotypes around tradies. 
He questions common audience assumptions about ‘what a tradie is or should be ’, through 
the listing of their ‘ personality’, ‘ dress’ and the way they ‘ behave’ , sparking interest in the idea 
of women working as tradies. 
Page 1 of 4 

               
        
  
      
   
    
     
    
    
      
  
      
      
           
  
     
 
 
  
  
         
     
         
     
      
  
          
                 
   
    
 
  NESA 2025 HSC English as an Additional Language or Dialect (EAL/D) — Listening Paper Marking Guidelines 
Question 2 
Criteria Marks 
• Analyses how Ellie and Elij ha communicate the dangers of being an 
electrician , supported by well -selected textual references 4 
• Explains how the speakers communicate the dangers of being an 
electrician , supported by relevant textual references 3 
• Describes how the speakers communicate the dangers of being an 
electrician , supported by textual reference(s) 2 
• Provides some relevant information 1 
Sample answer: 
Ellie and Elij ha discuss how Elijha’ s work as an electrician is dangerous. Ellie uses the 
personifi cation of ‘Mother Nature’ throwing a ‘ tantrum ’ to highlight the harsh conditions Elij ha 
works through that put her safety at risk. Elij ha uses juxtaposition to reinforce the danger of 
her work when she states ‘you can’ t see electricity and electricity definitely can see you ’. This 
shows that electricity is an invisible threat that Elij ha faces when she goes to work. 
Question 3 
Criteria Marks 
• Explains Mel Street ’s reasons for creating her social media group Lady 
Tradies and Rocking Chicks , supported by relevant textual references 3 
• Outlines Mel Street ’s reasons for creating her social media group Lady 
Tradies and Rocking Chicks , supported by textual reference(s) 2 
• Provides some relevant information 1 
Sample answer: 
Mel Street ’s early experience s of being the ‘only girl’ in her career made her realise that there 
was a lack of support for people in trades to network within the power generation industry. In 
addition, she works ‘quite regionally pretty much all the time’, so she was inspired to create 
Lady Tradies and Rocking Chicks as a supportive community for people in her field . 
Page 2 of 4 

               
        
  
     
   
     
     
    
  
      
  
      
  NESA 2025 HSC English as an Additional Language or Dialect (EAL/D) — Listening Paper Marking Guidelines 
Question 4 
Criteria Marks 
• Compares skilfully Elij ha’s and Mel ’s thoughts and feelings about being 
female tradies, supported by well -selected textual references 5 
• Compares effectively Elij ha’s and Mel ’s thoughts and feelings about 
being female tradies, supported by relevant textual references 4 
• Compares Elijha’s and Mel ’s thoughts and feelings about being female 
tradies, using textual references 3 
• Describes Elij ha’s and/or Mel’ s thoughts and /or feelings about being 
female tradies, supported by limited textual reference(s) 2 
• Provides some relevant information 1 
Sample answer: 
Both  Elijha  and Mel  convey their  passionate thoughts and feelings about  working in trades.   
 
Elijha  expresses the satisfaction of  being an electrician and helping others,  saying in a joyful  
tone  ‘everyone’ s gonna be smiling when that  power  comes back on ’. She communicates that 
even though her  colleagues are mostly men,  she feels proud representing women,  evident  in 
the exclamatory  ‘Go  me!’   
 
In contrast, Mel communicates her initial nervousness about becoming a tradie. Through  a 
personal  anecdote,  she recounts her  doubt  when told to go into trades,  asking ‘well,  can  I?’  
However,  much  like  Elijha, Mel displays a positive mindset, as seen through the repetition of 
‘onwards and upwards’  highlighting her  commitment  to overcoming obstacles as a female 
electrician.   
 
Overall,  both  women  have  positive  thoughts  and  feelings  about  being  a  female  tradie.  
Page 3 of 4 

               
       
 
    
 
     
     
     
     
  
 NESA 2025 HSC English as an Additional Language or Dialect (EAL/D) — Listening Paper Marking Guidelines 
2025 HSC   
English as an Additional  Language or  Dialect  
(EAL/D) —  Listening Paper  
Mapping  Grid  
Listening paper 
Question Marks Content Syllabus 
outcomes 
1 3 Listening skills EAL 12-2 
2 4 Listening skills EAL 12-4 
3 3 Listening skills EAL 12-5 
4 5 Listening skills EAL 12-4, 
EAL 12-7 
Page 4 of 4 

