    
 
 
        
    
  
  
 
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  
  NSW Education Standards Authority 
2025 HSC Hospitality
Kitchen Operations and Cookery
Marking Guidelines 
Section I  
Multiple- choice Answer Key 
Question Answer 
1 C 
2 B 
3 D 
4 C 
5 B 
6 C 
7 B 
8 C 
9 A 
10 A 
11 B 
12 D 
13 C 
14 A 
15 D 
Page 1 of 13 

           
       
  
             
 
 
 
 
  
 
   
      
  
 
  
            
            
  
    
  NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Kitchen Operations and Cookery Marking Guidelines 
Section II 
Question  16  (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •      Outline s how ONE food safety program applies to a hospitality workplace   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information   1 
Sample answer: 
A food safety program is a written plan that outlines how a business identifies and controls 
food safety hazards. A food safety program such as HACCP ensures food is safe to eat.  
Question  16  (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •             Outlines why it is important for a hospitality worker to declare information 
    about their personal health   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information   1 
Sample answer: It is important to declare notifiable diseases to protect public health. By declaring personal 
health issues, it reduces the spread of transmissible diseases that could be spread when 
food hand ling or in customer interactions. 
Question  16  (c)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Outlines  a safe food -handling work practice that  a hospitality business 
could implement  to ensure the safety of a  vulnerable customer ,  using an 
industry  example   3 
•  Outlines  a safe food -handling work practice  that a hospitality business 
could implement  to ensure the safety of a  vulnerable customer   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: 
Using a thermometer to e nsure food is cooked to safe internal temperatures in order to kill 
harmful bacteria is a safe food -handling work practice . For example, when serving poultry to 
elderly customers in a nursing home, cooked poultry should be checked with a thermometer 
to ensure the internal temperature has reached 75°C to prevent salmonella poisoning . 
Page 2 of 13 

           
        
  
           
      
  
               
  
 
 
 
  
    
     
   
  
 
  
  
 
 
 NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Kitchen Operations and Cookery Marking Guidelines 
Question 17 
Criteria Marks 
• Identifies the purpose of the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 (NSW) 2 
• Provides some relevant information 1 
Sample answer: 
The purpose of the Work Health and Safety Act 2011 (NSW) is to provide a framework which 
ensures the health, safety and welfare of workers and workplaces. 
Question  18  (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •  Outlines the importance of quality assurance in a hospitality business   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: Quality assurance ensures that a business remains competitive and successful. Customers 
receive consistent high-quality service standards from every aspect of the hospitality 
business. This can lead to repeat business. 
Question  18  (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •      Explains strategies that a hospitality employee could use to provide 
    quality customer service to new and regular customers  4 
 •       Outlines strategies that a hospitality employee could use to provide 
     quality customer service to new or regular customers  3 
 •     Identifies aspects of quality customer service   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: 
To  p rovide  quality  customer  service  to  new customers ,  an employee could welcome them  
with  a  smile  and  engage  them  in  conversation  to  learn  more  about  the  customer.  They  could  
introduce  them  to  loyalty  programs  that  exist  within  the  business  to  encourage  return  
patronage.   
 
To  provide  quality  customer  service  to  regular  customers ,  an employee could welcome them  
by name, know th  eir  preference and   ensure  transactions are record ed  on the business ’s  
loyalty  program.   
Page 3 of 13 

           
        
   
      
 
 
 
  
            
      
    
   
  
             
        
 
    NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Kitchen Operations and Cookery Marking Guidelines 
Question  19  (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •    Identifies the benefits of pre -operational safety checks in a commercial 
kitchen   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information   1 
Sample answer: 
Pre-operational safety checks ensure equipment is functioning correctly and hazards are 
identified and mitigated before operations begin. 
Question  19  (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •      Outlines the importance of teamwork to achieve effective workflow in a 
 hospitality business  2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: Teamwork is important as it increases productivity, which should result in enhanced 
customer experiences. Teamwork results in improved efficiency and enhanced workflow 
between the front and back of house. 
Question  19  (c)  
 Criteria  Marks 
•  Describe s  the possible consequences of a chef failing to follow a  
standard recipe on the customer  and the business   3 
•  Describe s  ONE  possible consequence of  a chef  failing to follow a  
standard recipe on the customer  and/or  the business  
OR  
•  Identifies  possible consequence s  of  a chef  failing to follow a  standard 
recipe on the customer and/or the business   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: 
Failure to follow a SRC could result in inconsistent portion sizes being served to customers. 
This could result in inconsistent menu items, customer dissatisfaction and inaccuracies in 
stock control. 
Page 4 of 13 

           
        
   
     
        
  
 
  
  
         
         
           
    
   
  
 
 NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Kitchen Operations and Cookery Marking Guidelines 
Question  20  (a)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •  Outlines the importance of including extraction fans in a cleaning regime   3 
 •       Outlines the importance of a cleaning regime  2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: 
It is important to include extraction fans in a cleaning regime; this will ensure extraction fans 
are regularly cleaned. Failure to clean extraction fans could result in a build- up of grease and 
thus a fire hazard. This may result in poor air quality and reduced ventilation, increasing 
environmental pollutants. 
Question  20  (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •       Explains the factors kitchen staff should consider when plating food  4 
 •       Outlines the factors kitchen staff should consider when plating food  3 
 •      Shows some understanding of plating food  2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: Kitchen staff should consider the visual appeal including height, the balance of colour and 
texture, and a range of elements like negative space, sauces, decorations and garnishes. 
They should also consider portion control and serving temperature. The kitchen staff should 
also consider the stability of the presentation so the food can maintain its presentation w hen 
being served to customers. 
Page 5 of 13 

           
        
  
       
 
         
       
 
         
       
 
      
       
  
      
  
        
 
   
  
     
   
 
 
  NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Kitchen Operations and Cookery Marking Guidelines 
Question 21 
Criteria Marks 
• Explains the impact of cleaning on the overall service provided by a 
hospitality establishment 
• Uses specific industry examples of BOTH food safety and hygiene 6 
• Outlines the impact of cleaning on the overall service provided by a 
hospitality establishment 
• Uses industry examples of BOTH food safety and hygiene 4–5 
• Outlines the impact of cleaning on the overall service provided by a 
hospitality establishment 
• Uses example (s) of food safety and/or hygiene 3 
• Demonstrates some understanding of reason(s) for cleaning and its 
impact 2 
• Provides some relevant information 1 
Sample answer: 
Proper cleaning is essential to prevent cross -contamination as it removes bacteria, allergens 
and contaminants. Ensuring the knife is cleaned between cutting chicken and salad 
vegetable will limit the spread of salmonella. Regular cleaning also ensures compliance with 
food safety standards, programs and regulations. Businesses can be fined if personal and 
environmental hygiene are not adhered to. The cleanliness of a business can also impact 
customer perceptions and reputation. 
Page 6 of 13 

           
       
  
     
        
 
 
 
  
 
 
  NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Kitchen Operations and Cookery Marking Guidelines 
Section III 
Question  22 (a)   
 Criteria  Marks 
 •    Identifies the key features of an à la carte menu   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: 
The key features of an à la carte menu are a range of dishes listed in each course, each dish 
is priced separately, dishes may/may not have description. 
Question  22 (b)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •          Provides a detailed explanation of how a kitchen could adapt this menu 
for customer requests and special dietary requirements   5 
 •           Provides a sound explanation of how a kitchen could adapt this menu for 
 customer requests and special dietary requirements   4 
 •         Outlines how a kitchen could adapt this menu for customer requests and 
  special dietary requirements  3 
 •       Provides some information about how a kitchen can adapt this menu for 
 customer requests and/or special dietary requirements   2 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Sample answer: The  k
itchen  can  adapt  the  menu  for  customer  requests as they come in with orders.  For  
example,  Thai  beef  salad could have extra chilli  added to it  if  the customer  wants a more 
intense  spiciness. The kitchen can cook the beef for the  grilled surf and turf to  customer  
liking  such  as  rare/medium  rare/medium/medium  well/well done.  
 
The  kitchen  can adapt  the menu for  special  dietary requirements by providing a n option of  
bruschetta with gluten free bread for  customers with coeliac disease.  For  the apple crumble 
dessert,  the kitchen could provide a dairy -free custard as an alternative for people with  
lactose  intolerance .  
Page 7 of 13 

           
        NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Kitchen Operations and Cookery Marking Guidelines 
Question  22 (c)  
 Criteria  Marks 
 •          Provides a comprehensive explanation of the importance of the mise en 
 place tasks for preparing, cooking and presenting BOTH dishes   8 
 •        Provides a sound explanation of the importance of the mise en place 
 tasks for preparing, cooking and presenting BOTH dishes   6–7 
 •           Provides information about the mise en place tasks for preparing and/or 
   cooking and/or presenting BOTH dishes  4–5 
 •          Provides basic information about the mis en place tasks f or preparing 
  and/or cooking and/or presenting   2–3 
 •     Provides some relevant information  1 
Answers  could include:  
Mise  en  place  stands  for  ‘everything in its place’.  A chef  should  have  all  their  ingredients  and  
supplies prepared and organi sed before they commence cooking.   
 
The  mise  en  place  tasks  required for the  pan-fried mushroom- stuffed chicken could include:  
•  Preparing:  
–  Portioning  and  trimming  the  chicken  
–  Preparing  the  mushroom s  tuffing  
–  Stuffing  the  chicken  
–  Wash ing, peel ing  and cutting  potatoes  
By  completing  all  these  steps  prior  to  cooking,  the  chef  will  have  a  smoother  workflow as  all  
pre-prepared components will  be ready and on hand.  
 
•  Cooking:  
–  Pre-heating the fry pan or  griddle  
–  Cooking  and  mashing  potatoes,  ready  for  hot  holding  
This  allows  for  the  chef  to  start  cooking  chicken  as  soon  as  orders  come  into  the  kitchen.  If  
mashed  potatoes  are  already  prepared,  it  reduces  the  time  between  finishing  the  chicken  
cooking and plating.  
 
•  Presenting:  
–  Portioning  the  mashed  potatoes,  ready  for  plating  
–  Preparing  garnishes  
–  Pre-heating  lamps  on  the  pass  
–  Warming  service  plates  
Pre-warmed  plates  will  ensure  the  meal  stays  warm d  uring  plating,  on  the  pass  and  as  they  
are transferred to the customer.  Pre-portioning the mashed potato allows staff  on the pass to 
quickly plate multiple orders.  Any garnishes required will  be on hand and ready to place on 
the dish,  increasing  the  efficiency.  
Page 8 of 13 

           
       
 NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Kitchen Operations and Cookery Marking Guidelines 
The  mise  en  place  tasks  required for the  apple crumble could include:  
•  Preparing:  
–  Preparing  the  crumble  topping  
–  Peeling  and  dicing  the  apple  
–  Pre-making  the  custard  
By  preparing  these  components  before  cooking,  the  chef  can  have  a  smoother  workflow.  The  
apple crumble could be pre- portioned into individual  ramekins which would reduce cooking 
time, ensure consistency in portion size  and reduce customer  wait  times .  
 
•  Cooking:  
–  Pre-heating  the  oven  
–  Cooking  custard,  ready for  warm hol  ding  
Having  custard  kept  warm c  an  save  time  when  plating  dessert  orders  as  it  is  ready  and  on  
hand for  when orders come into the kitchen.  
 
•  Presenting:  
–  Pre-heating  lamps  on  the  pass  
–  Warming  service  plates  
–  Preparing  any  garnishes  eg  fanned  strawberries  
Pre-warming  service  plates  will  ensure  the  apple  crumble  and  custard  stays  warm wh  ile  the  
dishes are on the pass and transferred to the customer .  
 
Page 9 of 13 

           
        
  
            
      
 
        
         
            
       
 
        
        
       
      
        
         
        
    
      
  NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Kitchen Operations and Cookery Marking Guidelines 
Section IV  
Question 23 
Criteria Marks 
• Provides a comprehensive analysis of the impact of the human, social, 
economic and organi sational costs of workplace injury in the hospitality 
industry 
• Presents a logical and cohesive response 
• Uses specific hospitality industry examples and terminology 13–15 
• Provides a detailed explanation of the impact of the human, social, 
economic and organi sational costs of workplace injury in the hospitality 
industry 
• Presents a logical and cohesive response 
• Uses hospitality industry examples and terminology 10–12 
• Outlines the impact of the human, social, economic and organi sational 
costs of workplace injury in the hospitality industry 
• Uses hospitality industry examples and/or terminology 7–9 
• Provides some information about human and/or social and/or economic 
and/or organisational costs of workplace injury in the hospitality industry 
• Provides example(s) 4–6 
• Provides some relevant information 1–3 
Answers  could include:  
Workplace  injury  can  have  a  significant  human,  economic,  social  and  organisational  impact  
that affect s  employees, businesses and society. Workplace injuries within the hospitality  
industry  are  varied,  including  implications  associated  with  levels  of  impairment  and  time  
required off work.  
 
Addressing  these  multifaceted  costs  requires  a  proactive  approach  that  prioritises  safety,  
fosters a culture of positive wellbeing and encourages robust risk management strategies to  
protect  workers and ensure the sustainability of  the business.   
 
•  Human  costs:  
–  Injury  can lead to stress,  anxiety and depression that  impact  quality of  life.  
–  Lack of  independence  and  ability to engage in the workforce  can have a detrimental  
impact  on  wellbeing.   
–  The  pain  and  trauma  associated  with  injury  can  impact  mental,  emotional  and  physical  
health.  
 
•  Economic  costs:  
–  Higher  insurance  premiums,  recruitment  and training costs  
–  Additional  wages  for  casual  staff  replacing  injured  workers  
–  Decreased  profitability  and  increased  legal  costs  
–  Modifications  to  workplace  or  equipment.   
Page 10 of 13 

           
        NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Kitchen Operations and Cookery Marking Guidelines 
•  Social  costs:  
–  Family  members  may  be  placed  under  financial  pressure  with  a  significant  loss  of  
income  and  increased  medical expenses.   
–  Family members may have to  provide care,  and therefore may impede their  ability to 
earn an income or  impact  their  wellbeing.  
–  Increased  demand for  medical  services,  which could affect the availability to medical  
services for  the wider  community.   
–  Staff  shortages  in  the  workplace  may  increase  anxiety,  fearing  similar  risks,  and  stress  
due to taking on additional  tasks or  shifts.   
 
•  Organisational  costs:  
–  Decrease  in  working  hours  and decreased efficiency.  
–  Low m orale,  leading  to increased staff absenteeism. A reduced workforce may result in  
delays in service,  impacting operational  efficiency and customer  satisfaction.    
–  Reduced  productivity,  staff  retention  and  reputational  damage.  
Page 11 of 13 

           
        
    
  
 
  
      
        
          
          
          
          
  
          
          
             
          
          
        
        
          
        
          
  
      
        
         
          
         
           
   
           
         
    
          
          
          
   
           
         
    NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Kitchen Operations and Cookery Marking Guidelines 
2025 HSC Hospitality
Kitchen Operations and Cookery Mapping Grid 
Section I 
Question Marks HSC content – focus area 
1 1 Hygiene – compliance – page 25 
2 1 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – knives – page 57 
3 1 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – preparation – page 60 
4 1 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – cookery methods – page 60 
5 1 Working with colleagues and customers – anti-discrimination – 
page 42 
6 1 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – cookery methods – page 61 
7 1 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – preparation – page 60 
8 1 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – clean and sanitise – page 64 
9 1 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – preparation – page 59 
10 1 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – cookery methods – page 60 
11 1 Hygiene – compliance – page 25 
12 1 Hygiene – food contamination and food -borne illnesses – page 28 
13 1 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – preparation – page 59 
14 1 Safety – compliance – page 25 
15 1 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – preparation – page 60 
Section II 
Question Marks HSC content – focus area 
16 (a) 2 Hygiene – food safety program – page 26 
16 (b) 2 Hygiene – hazards impacting food safety – page 25 
16 (c) 3 Hygiene – safe food handling work practices – page 24 
17 2 Safety – WHS compliance – page 31 
18 (a) 2 Working with colleagues and customers – quality customer service 
– page 39 
18 (b) 4 Working with colleagues and customers – customers – page 39 
19 (a) 2 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – equipment for food preparation 
and cookery – page 57 
19 (b) 2 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – preparation – page 59 
19 (c) 3 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – preparation – page 59 
20 (a) 3 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – kitchen premises and equipment 
– page 63 
20 (b) 4 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – presentation of food – page 61 
21 6 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – commercial kitchen work 
environment – page 62 
Page 12 of 13 

           
        
      
           
           
          
  
      
           
 
 NESA 2025 HSC Hospitality – Kitchen Operations and Cookery Marking Guidelines 
Se
ction III 
Question Marks HSC content – focus area 
22 (a) 2 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – menu – page 60 
22 (b) 5 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – menu – page 60 
22 (c) 8 Kitchen Operations and Cookery – preparation – page 59 
Section IV 
Question Marks HSC content – focus area 
23 15 Safety – incidents, accidents and emergencies – page 35 
Page 13 of 13 

