=== The Conceptual Framework ===
Subject: visual-arts
============================================================

Students learn how the frames provide alternative ways to build and shape their investigations of concepts and meanings in art criticism and art history. Students' knowledge of the variations in the relationships between agencies in the conceptual framework when using the frames will create different accounts of practice and can generate a more informed development of their own practice. 




8.4	The Conceptual Framework - Agencies in the Artworld

The conceptual framework provides a theoretical model for understanding the agencies in the artworld. Each agency exists within the network of intentional relationships and functions they perform relative to each other. 
In artmaking, the relational nature of the agencies in the conceptual framework provides a way of understanding practice and acts as a useful model for students in developing their own practice. It assists students to understand their own role as an artist and develop their intentions in what they make as artworks and as a body of work. Artmaking allows students to take on the role of audience and to anticipate how their work may be understood by other audiences in relation to their representational interests.
In art criticism and art history, the conceptual framework provides a way to evaluate and explain the significance of particular artists, artworks, audience responses and representations of the world at a certain time and over time. Changes to the interpretation of these relationships are conditional to a particular time and place and to the point of view or frame that is applied to such interpretations.

Through the conceptual framework students learn about the concept of the:
Artist
The artist has a functional relationship to each of the agencies in the conceptual framework generated by the frames. The function of the artist is not a fixed category and can be understood as roles that are assigned or assumed within the field at different times and places and in relation to the different value systems that are used to interpret their role. The intentions and characteristics artists develop within these complex networks of relationships contribute to practice. 
The agency of the artist includes:
* a person making artworks individually, collaboratively as a group, school, movement or enlisting others to produce their work
* practitioners such as artists, craftspeople, designers, architects, filmmakers, performance artists, digital and multimodal practitioners. 

Audience 
Audiences play an active role in interpreting and ascribing meanings for artworks and art practices. The audience function is ongoing and changeable, intrinsic to the resolution of meaning and the different interpretations of artworks as they occur in and inhabit different contexts, times and places.
The concept of the audience includes art critics and art historians, teachers, students, entrepreneurs, patrons, curators, dealers, members of the public, auction houses, writers and theorists. Audiences are produced through the display of, and interaction with, artworks.
Audiences for works change over time and bring different intentions, beliefs and values to artworks, artists and interpretations of the world. They inhabit different histories, worlds, identities and beliefs. Art criticism and art history are aligned with the audience function. In their critical and historical accounts about the visual arts, students engage with the agencies in the conceptual framework and their relationships with each other.

Artwork 
Artworks are intentionally conceived and made by artists working individually or collaboratively. Artworks have properties and forms that are material, virtual, physical and symbolic that exists in combinations of materials, technical skills, concepts and subjects.
Artworks exist as a representation of ideas that reflect such things as personal responses, cultural views, symbolic interpretations and critical reinterpretations of other ideas. Artworks are representations of meanings when viewed interpretively by audiences. The form of production or reproduction affects how audiences view and infer meaning about the work.
Artworks can be considered:
* in physical, material, virtual and ephemeral forms
* as 2D, 3D, 4D and time-based works
* as art, craft, and design as two- and three-dimensional works (including architecture), four-dimensional and time-based works, as well as multimodal and interactive media, temporal, ephemeral and relational forms, synthetic realities and other new and emergent technologies and forms.

World
The agency of the world functions as a source of interests, ideas, conditions and events represented by artists in artworks. The agency of the world designates the systematic ideas of the time, existing theoretical commitments and what is considered plausible and credible in the field of visual arts, representations of experience, class, ideology, age and events of significance.
As such, the world informs the significance of artistic choice and action as well as audience inference of meaning. Art criticism and art history provide further insights and elaborations of the world. Audiences infer meanings through their interactions with artworks in relation to their thoughts, beliefs and understanding of the world and of art. 
Artists' responses to the world may shape the dynamics of practice as a vigorous and changing entity. Artists can also investigate, interpret and represent the world as a material, conceptual and social experience as well as a place of imaginings, intuition and the personal as ideas for representation.
The function of the world as it articulates differently through each frame is not to be confused with the cultural frame which refers to issues of power and identity arising from the economic, social and political.
In the Preliminary and HSC courses students learn about how the agencies in the conceptual framework and the relational networks they form can be critically and historically evaluated and explained. The selection of artists, audiences, artworks and worlds is left to the discretion of teachers in the learning opportunities offered to students. 

The Conceptual Framework: relationship to other areas of content
The sets of relationships between the four agencies are shaped and generated by the frames. Each frame provides a particular way to interpret the different functional and intentional relationships between the four agencies. The intentions and motives involved in the production, display and reception of art are considered in relation to interpretations of the functions and roles each of the agencies in the conceptual framework is assigned in different times, places and value systems. 
Interpretations using the subjective frame view relationships between artists, artworks, audiences and the world through felt, sensory, emotional and psychological states. From this perspective various formative contexts concerned with personal beliefs and associations, the subconscious and the imaginary inform the intentions of, and contribute to, the function of the artist. 
Interpretations using the cultural frame view particular social, economic and political conditions in the world as explanatory contexts for understanding art. From this perspective artists reflect, produce and are influenced by or react to particular social experiences of the world. Audiences are interpreted as sharing a similar, socially contextual, set of relationships conditioned by the world.
Interpretations using the structural frame view artists as producing artworks that represent the world using systems of signs and symbols that share a visual language read by artists and audiences for meaning. From this perspective, artists work within conventions of representation that imbue materials, techniques and imagery with communicative value. 
Interpretations using the postmodern frame view artworld relationships as complex reconfigurations, replications, contradictions and challenges to historical and current narratives of art and representations of the world. From this perspective art practices deal with the manipulation of time and history, ideas, subject matter, audiences, pushing boundaries and challenging established ideology and orthodoxies.

8.5   	The Frames

Students learn about the frames - subjective, cultural, structural and postmodern - that provide different philosophical/theoretical and interpretive frameworks for understanding the layering of meaning, significance, value and belief in and about the visual arts.
Students learn to adopt points of view through using the frames when approaching their own practice in artmaking, art criticism and art history. Students learn how each frame sets up different intentional and functional relations between artists, artworks, the world and the audience. Students learn that the frames provide alternative ways for interpreting and explaining meanings and why artists (including themselves) and audiences (including themselves, teachers, art critics, art historians and the general public) take on different points of view of what is of value.

Through the frames, students learn how art may represent:

Subjective frame - personal and psychological experience 
Through this frame, art may be thought to be about and represent deeply felt and sensory experiences and perceptions of the world. The subjective frame is concerned with individual feeling, emotion, imagination and personal experience. 
    From the perspective of the subjective frame the unconscious, intuition and imagination can be explored as a source of ideas and insight into how human experiences are shared and re-created between artists and audiences. These can be investigations of sensory world experience, the human consciousness and human relationships in artworks, as well as exploring notions of originality, creative expression, intersubjectivity and the intuitive response. Meaning is understood in relation to the intersubjective experiences of the artist and audience as shared psychological understanding.
In artmaking students can:
* explore their own deeply felt experiences and perceptions of the world
* investigate their own and others' feelings and responses to the world around them. This may influence their selection and imaginative investigation of subject matter
* explore autobiographical and personal concerns and/or experiences of significance from their own environment. This can include world events that have an impact on an intimate level